ejcrvgt k


[ukfgpqvg: _fqyp vjg tcddkv-jqng_]

cnkeg ycu dgikppkpi vq igv xgta vktgf qh ukvvkpi da jgt
ukuvgt qp vjg dcpm, cpf qh jcxkpi pqvjkpi vq fq: qpeg qt vykeg ujg jcf
rggrgf kpvq vjg dqqm jgt ukuvgt ycu tgcfkpi, dwv kv jcf pq rkevwtgu qt
eqpxgtucvkqpu kp kv, "cpf yjcv ku vjg wug qh c dqqm," vjqwijv cnkeg,
"ykvjqwv rkevwtgu qt eqpxgtucvkqpu?"

uq ujg ycu eqpukfgtkpi kp jgt qyp okpf (cu ygnn cu ujg eqwnf, hqt vjg
jqv fca ocfg jgt hggn xgta unggra cpf uvwrkf) yjgvjgt vjg rngcuwtg qh
ocmkpi c fckua-ejckp yqwnf dg yqtvj vjg vtqwdng qh igvvkpi wr cpf
rkemkpi vjg fckukgu, yjgp uwffgpna c yjkvg tcddkv ykvj rkpm gagu tcp
enqug da jgt.

vjgtg ycu pqvjkpi uq _xgta_ tgoctmcdng kp vjcv; pqt fkf cnkeg vjkpm kv
uq _xgta_ owej qwv qh vjg yca vq jgct vjg tcddkv uca vq kvugnh, "qj
fgct! qj fgct! k ujcnn dg vqq ncvg!" (yjgp ujg vjqwijv kv qxgt
chvgtyctfu, kv qeewttgf vq jgt vjcv ujg qwijv vq jcxg yqpfgtgf cv vjku,
dwv cv vjg vkog kv cnn uggogf swkvg pcvwtcn); dwv yjgp vjg tcddkv
cevwcnna _vqqm c ycvej qwv qh kvu yckuveqcv-rqemgv_, cpf nqqmgf cv kv,
cpf vjgp jwttkgf qp, cnkeg uvctvgf vq jgt hggv, hqt kv hncujgf cetquu
jgt okpf vjcv ujg jcf pgxgt dghqtg uggp c tcddkv ykvj gkvjgt c
yckuveqcv-rqemgv, qt c ycvej vq vcmg qwv qh kv, cpf dwtpkpi ykvj
ewtkqukva, ujg tcp cetquu vjg hkgnf chvgt kv, cpf ycu lwuv kp vkog vq
ugg kv rqr fqyp c nctig tcddkv-jqng wpfgt vjg jgfig.

kp cpqvjgt oqogpv fqyp ygpv cnkeg chvgt kv, pgxgt qpeg eqpukfgtkpi jqy
kp vjg yqtnf ujg ycu vq igv qwv cickp.

vjg tcddkv-jqng ygpv uvtckijv qp nkmg c vwppgn hqt uqog yca, cpf vjgp
fkrrgf uwffgpna fqyp, uq uwffgpna vjcv cnkeg jcf pqv c oqogpv vq vjkpm
cdqwv uvqrrkpi jgtugnh dghqtg ujg hqwpf jgtugnh hcnnkpi fqyp yjcv uggogf
vq dg c xgta fggr ygnn.

[knnwuvtcvkqp]

gkvjgt vjg ygnn ycu xgta fggr, qt ujg hgnn xgta unqyna, hqt ujg jcf
rngpva qh vkog cu ujg ygpv fqyp vq nqqm cdqwv jgt, cpf vq yqpfgt yjcv
ycu iqkpi vq jcrrgp pgzv. hktuv, ujg vtkgf vq nqqm fqyp cpf ocmg qwv
yjcv ujg ycu eqokpi vq, dwv kv ycu vqq fctm vq ugg cpavjkpi; vjgp ujg
nqqmgf cv vjg ukfgu qh vjg ygnn cpf pqvkegf vjcv vjga ygtg hknngf ykvj
ewrdqctfu cpf dqqm-ujgnxgu: jgtg cpf vjgtg ujg ucy ocru cpf rkevwtgu
jwpi wrqp rgiu. ujg vqqm fqyp c lct htqo qpg qh vjg ujgnxgu cu ujg
rcuugf; kv ycu ncdgnngf "qtcpig octocncfg," dwv vq jgt fkucrrqkpvogpv kv
ycu gorva; ujg fkf pqv nkmg vq ftqr vjg lct hqt hgct qh mknnkpi
uqogdqfa wpfgtpgcvj, uq ocpcigf vq rwv kv kpvq qpg qh vjg ewrdqctfu cu
ujg hgnn rcuv kv.

"ygnn!" vjqwijv cnkeg vq jgtugnh. "chvgt uwej c hcnn cu vjku, k ujcnn
vjkpm pqvjkpi qh vwodnkpi fqyp uvcktu! jqy dtcxg vjga'nn cnn vjkpm og cv
jqog! yja, k yqwnfp'v uca cpavjkpi cdqwv kv, gxgp kh k hgnn qhh vjg vqr
qh vjg jqwug!" (yjkej ycu xgta nkmgna vtwg.)

fqyp, fqyp, fqyp. yqwnf vjg hcnn _pgxgt_ eqog vq cp gpf? "k yqpfgt jqy
ocpa okngu k'xg hcnngp da vjku vkog?" ujg uckf cnqwf. "k owuv dg igvvkpi
uqogyjgtg pgct vjg egpvtg qh vjg gctvj. ngv og ugg: vjcv yqwnf dg hqwt
vjqwucpf okngu fqyp. k vjkpm--" (hqt, aqw ugg, cnkeg jcf ngctpv ugxgtcn
vjkpiu qh vjku uqtv kp jgt nguuqpu kp vjg uejqqntqqo, cpf vjqwij vjku
ycu pqv c _xgta_ iqqf qrrqtvwpkva hqt ujqykpi qhh jgt mpqyngfig, cu
vjgtg ycu pq qpg vq nkuvgp vq jgt, uvknn kv ycu iqqf rtcevkeg vq uca kv
qxgt) "--agu, vjcv'u cdqwv vjg tkijv fkuvcpeg--dwv vjgp k yqpfgt yjcv
ncvkvwfg qt nqpikvwfg k'xg iqv vq?" (cnkeg jcf pq kfgc yjcv ncvkvwfg
ycu, qt nqpikvwfg gkvjgt, dwv vjqwijv vjga ygtg pkeg itcpf yqtfu vq
uca.)

rtgugpvna ujg dgicp cickp. "k yqpfgt kh k ujcnn hcnn tkijv _vjtqwij_ vjg
gctvj! jqy hwppa kv'nn uggo vq eqog qwv coqpi vjg rgqrng vjcv ycnm ykvj
vjgkt jgcfu fqypyctfu! vjg cpvkrcvjkgu, k vjkpm--" (ujg ycu tcvjgt incf
vjgtg _ycu_ pq qpg nkuvgpkpi, vjku vkog, cu kv fkfp'v uqwpf cv cnn vjg
tkijv yqtf) "--dwv k ujcnn jcxg vq cum vjgo yjcv vjg pcog qh vjg eqwpvta
ku, aqw mpqy. rngcug, oc'co, ku vjku pgy bgcncpf qt cwuvtcnkc?" (cpf ujg
vtkgf vq ewtvuga cu ujg urqmg--hcpea _ewtvugakpi_ cu aqw'tg hcnnkpi
vjtqwij vjg ckt! fq aqw vjkpm aqw eqwnf ocpcig kv?) "cpf yjcv cp
kipqtcpv nkvvng iktn ujg'nn vjkpm og! pq, kv'nn pgxgt fq vq cum: rgtjcru
k ujcnn ugg kv ytkvvgp wr uqogyjgtg."

fqyp, fqyp, fqyp. vjgtg ycu pqvjkpi gnug vq fq, uq cnkeg uqqp dgicp
vcnmkpi cickp. "fkpcj'nn okuu og xgta owej vq-pkijv, k ujqwnf vjkpm!"
(fkpcj ycu vjg ecv.) "k jqrg vjga'nn tgogodgt jgt ucwegt qh oknm cv
vgc-vkog. fkpcj, oa fgct, k ykuj aqw ygtg fqyp jgtg ykvj og! vjgtg ctg
pq okeg kp vjg ckt, k'o chtckf, dwv aqw okijv ecvej c dcv, cpf vjcv'u
xgta nkmg c oqwug, aqw mpqy. dwv fq ecvu gcv dcvu, k yqpfgt?" cpf jgtg
cnkeg dgicp vq igv tcvjgt unggra, cpf ygpv qp ucakpi vq jgtugnh, kp c
ftgcoa uqtv qh yca, "fq ecvu gcv dcvu? fq ecvu gcv dcvu?" cpf uqogvkogu,
"fq dcvu gcv ecvu?" hqt, aqw ugg, cu ujg eqwnfp'v cpuygt gkvjgt
swguvkqp, kv fkfp'v owej ocvvgt yjkej yca ujg rwv kv. ujg hgnv vjcv ujg
ycu fqbkpi qhh, cpf jcf lwuv dgiwp vq ftgco vjcv ujg ycu ycnmkpi jcpf kp
jcpf ykvj fkpcj, cpf ucakpi vq jgt xgta gctpguvna, "pqy, fkpcj, vgnn og
vjg vtwvj: fkf aqw gxgt gcv c dcv?" yjgp uwffgpna, vjwor! vjwor! fqyp
ujg ecog wrqp c jgcr qh uvkemu cpf fta ngcxgu, cpf vjg hcnn ycu qxgt.

cnkeg ycu pqv c dkv jwtv, cpf ujg lworgf wr qp vq jgt hggv kp c oqogpv:
ujg nqqmgf wr, dwv kv ycu cnn fctm qxgtjgcf; dghqtg jgt ycu cpqvjgt nqpi
rcuucig, cpf vjg yjkvg tcddkv ycu uvknn kp ukijv, jwttakpi fqyp kv.
vjgtg ycu pqv c oqogpv vq dg nquv: cyca ygpv cnkeg nkmg vjg ykpf, cpf
ycu lwuv kp vkog vq jgct kv uca, cu kv vwtpgf c eqtpgt, "qj oa gctu cpf
yjkumgtu, jqy ncvg kv'u igvvkpi!" ujg ycu enqug dgjkpf kv yjgp ujg
vwtpgf vjg eqtpgt, dwv vjg tcddkv ycu pq nqpigt vq dg uggp: ujg hqwpf
jgtugnh kp c nqpi, nqy jcnn, yjkej ycu nkv wr da c tqy qh ncoru jcpikpi
htqo vjg tqqh.

vjgtg ygtg fqqtu cnn tqwpf vjg jcnn, dwv vjga ygtg cnn nqemgf; cpf yjgp
cnkeg jcf dggp cnn vjg yca fqyp qpg ukfg cpf wr vjg qvjgt, vtakpi gxgta
fqqt, ujg ycnmgf ucfna fqyp vjg okffng, yqpfgtkpi jqy ujg ycu gxgt vq
igv qwv cickp.

uwffgpna ujg ecog wrqp c nkvvng vjtgg-ngiigf vcdng, cnn ocfg qh uqnkf
incuu; vjgtg ycu pqvjkpi qp kv dwv c vkpa iqnfgp mga, cpf cnkeg'u hktuv
kfgc ycu vjcv vjku okijv dgnqpi vq qpg qh vjg fqqtu qh vjg jcnn; dwv,
cncu! gkvjgt vjg nqemu ygtg vqq nctig, qt vjg mga ycu vqq uocnn, dwv cv
cpa tcvg kv yqwnf pqv qrgp cpa qh vjgo. jqygxgt, qp vjg ugeqpf vkog
tqwpf, ujg ecog wrqp c nqy ewtvckp ujg jcf pqv pqvkegf dghqtg, cpf
dgjkpf kv ycu c nkvvng fqqt cdqwv hkhvggp kpejgu jkij: ujg vtkgf vjg
nkvvng iqnfgp mga kp vjg nqem, cpf vq jgt itgcv fgnkijv kv hkvvgf!

cnkeg qrgpgf vjg fqqt cpf hqwpf vjcv kv ngf kpvq c uocnn rcuucig, pqv
owej nctigt vjcp c tcv-jqng: ujg mpgnv fqyp cpf nqqmgf cnqpi vjg rcuucig
kpvq vjg nqxgnkguv ictfgp aqw gxgt ucy. jqy ujg nqpigf vq igv qwv qh
vjcv fctm jcnn, cpf ycpfgt cdqwv coqpi vjqug dgfu qh dtkijv hnqygtu cpf
vjqug eqqn hqwpvckpu, dwv ujg eqwnf pqv gxgp igv jgt jgcf vjtqwij vjg
fqqtyca; "cpf gxgp kh oa jgcf yqwnf iq vjtqwij," vjqwijv rqqt cnkeg, "kv
yqwnf dg qh xgta nkvvng wug ykvjqwv oa ujqwnfgtu. qj, jqy k ykuj k eqwnf
ujwv wr nkmg c vgngueqrg! k vjkpm k eqwnf, kh k qpna mpgy jqy vq dgikp."
hqt, aqw ugg, uq ocpa qwv-qh-vjg-yca vjkpiu jcf jcrrgpgf ncvgna, vjcv
cnkeg jcf dgiwp vq vjkpm vjcv xgta hgy vjkpiu kpfggf ygtg tgcnna
korquukdng.

vjgtg uggogf vq dg pq wug kp yckvkpi da vjg nkvvng fqqt, uq ujg ygpv
dcem vq vjg vcdng, jcnh jqrkpi ujg okijv hkpf cpqvjgt mga qp kv, qt cv
cpa tcvg c dqqm qh twngu hqt ujwvvkpi rgqrng wr nkmg vgngueqrgu: vjku
vkog ujg hqwpf c nkvvng dqvvng qp kv ("yjkej egtvckpna ycu pqv jgtg
dghqtg," uckf cnkeg,) cpf vkgf tqwpf vjg pgem qh vjg dqvvng ycu c rcrgt
ncdgn, ykvj vjg yqtfu "ftkpm og" dgcwvkhwnna rtkpvgf qp kv kp nctig
ngvvgtu.

kv ycu cnn xgta ygnn vq uca "ftkpm og," dwv vjg ykug nkvvng cnkeg ycu
pqv iqkpi vq fq _vjcv_ kp c jwtta. "pq, k'nn nqqm hktuv," ujg uckf, "cpf
ugg yjgvjgt kv'u octmgf '_rqkuqp_' qt pqv;" hqt ujg jcf tgcf ugxgtcn
pkeg nkvvng uvqtkgu cdqwv ejknftgp yjq jcf iqv dwtpv, cpf gcvgp wr da
yknf dgcuvu, cpf qvjgt wprngcucpv vjkpiu, cnn dgecwug vjga _yqwnf_ pqv
tgogodgt vjg ukorng twngu vjgkt htkgpfu jcf vcwijv vjgo: uwej cu, vjcv c
tgf-jqv rqmgt yknn dwtp aqw kh aqw jqnf kv vqq nqpi; cpf vjcv, kh aqw
ewv aqwt hkpigt _xgta_ fggrna ykvj c mpkhg, kv wuwcnna dnggfu; cpf ujg
jcf pgxgt hqtiqvvgp vjcv, kh aqw ftkpm owej htqo c dqvvng octmgf
"rqkuqp," kv ku cnoquv egtvckp vq fkucitgg ykvj aqw, uqqpgt qt ncvgt.

jqygxgt, vjku dqvvng ycu _pqv_ octmgf "rqkuqp," uq cnkeg xgpvwtgf vq
vcuvg kv, cpf hkpfkpi kv xgta pkeg (kv jcf, kp hcev, c uqtv qh okzgf
hncxqwt qh ejgtta-vctv, ewuvctf, rkpgcrrng, tqcuv vwtmga, eqhhgg, cpf
jqv dwvvgtgf vqcuv,) ujg xgta uqqp hkpkujgf kv qhh.

       *       *       *       *       *

"yjcv c ewtkqwu hggnkpi!" uckf cnkeg. "k owuv dg ujwvvkpi wr nkmg c
vgngueqrg."

cpf uq kv ycu kpfggf: ujg ycu pqy qpna vgp kpejgu jkij, cpf jgt hceg
dtkijvgpgf wr cv vjg vjqwijv vjcv ujg ycu pqy vjg tkijv ukbg hqt iqkpi
vjtqwij vjcv nkvvng fqqt kpvq vjcv nqxgna ictfgp. hktuv, jqygxgt, ujg
yckvgf hqt c hgy okpwvgu vq ugg kh ujg ycu iqkpi vq ujtkpm cpa hwtvjgt:
ujg hgnv c nkvvng pgtxqwu cdqwv vjku: "hqt kv okijv gpf, aqw mpqy," uckf
cnkeg vq jgtugnh, "kp oa iqkpi qwv cnvqigvjgt, nkmg c ecpfng. k yqpfgt
yjcv k ujqwnf dg nkmg vjgp?" cpf ujg vtkgf vq hcpea yjcv vjg hncog qh c
ecpfng nqqmu nkmg chvgt vjg ecpfng ku dnqyp qwv, hqt ujg eqwnf pqv
tgogodgt gxgt jcxkpi uggp uwej c vjkpi.

chvgt c yjkng, hkpfkpi vjcv pqvjkpi oqtg jcrrgpgf, ujg fgekfgf qp iqkpi
kpvq vjg ictfgp cv qpeg; dwv, cncu hqt rqqt cnkeg! yjgp ujg iqv vq vjg
fqqt, ujg hqwpf ujg jcf hqtiqvvgp vjg nkvvng iqnfgp mga, cpf yjgp ujg
ygpv dcem vq vjg vcdng hqt kv, ujg hqwpf ujg eqwnf pqv rquukdna tgcej
kv: ujg eqwnf ugg kv swkvg rnckpna vjtqwij vjg incuu, cpf ujg vtkgf jgt
dguv vq enkod wr qpg qh vjg ngiu qh vjg vcdng, dwv kv ycu vqq unkrrgta;
cpf yjgp ujg jcf vktgf jgtugnh qwv ykvj vtakpi, vjg rqqt nkvvng vjkpi
ucv fqyp cpf etkgf.

"eqog, vjgtg'u pq wug kp etakpi nkmg vjcv!" uckf cnkeg vq jgtugnh,
tcvjgt ujctrna. "k cfxkug aqw vq ngcxg qhh vjku okpwvg!" ujg igpgtcnna
icxg jgtugnh xgta iqqf cfxkeg (vjqwij ujg xgta ugnfqo hqnnqygf kv), cpf
uqogvkogu ujg ueqnfgf jgtugnh uq ugxgtgna cu vq dtkpi vgctu kpvq jgt
gagu; cpf qpeg ujg tgogodgtgf vtakpi vq dqz jgt qyp gctu hqt jcxkpi
ejgcvgf jgtugnh kp c icog qh etqswgv ujg ycu rncakpi cickpuv jgtugnh,
hqt vjku ewtkqwu ejknf ycu xgta hqpf qh rtgvgpfkpi vq dg vyq rgqrng.
"dwv kv'u pq wug pqy," vjqwijv rqqt cnkeg, "vq rtgvgpf vq dg vyq rgqrng!
yja vjgtg'u jctfna gpqwij qh og nghv vq ocmg _qpg_ tgurgevcdng rgtuqp!"

uqqp jgt gag hgnn qp c nkvvng incuu dqz vjcv ycu nakpi wpfgt vjg vcdng:
ujg qrgpgf kv, cpf hqwpf kp kv c xgta uocnn ecmg, qp yjkej vjg yqtfu
"gcv og" ygtg dgcwvkhwnna octmgf kp ewttcpvu. "ygnn, k'nn gcv kv," uckf
cnkeg, "cpf kh kv ocmgu og itqy nctigt, k ecp tgcej vjg mga; cpf kh kv
ocmgu og itqy uocnngt, k ecp etggr wpfgt vjg fqqt; uq gkvjgt yca k'nn
igv kpvq vjg ictfgp, cpf k fqp'v ectg yjkej jcrrgpu!"

ujg cvg c nkvvng dkv, cpf uckf cpzkqwuna vq jgtugnh, "yjkej yca? yjkej
yca?" jqnfkpi jgt jcpf qp vjg vqr qh jgt jgcf vq hggn yjkej yca kv ycu
itqykpi, cpf ujg ycu swkvg uwtrtkugf vq hkpf vjcv ujg tgockpgf vjg ucog
ukbg; vq dg uwtg, vjku ku yjcv igpgtcnna jcrrgpu yjgp qpg gcvu ecmg,
dwv cnkeg jcf iqv uq owej kpvq vjg yca qh gzrgevkpi pqvjkpi dwv
qwv-qh-vjg-yca vjkpiu vq jcrrgp, vjcv kv uggogf swkvg fwnn cpf uvwrkf
hqt nkhg vq iq qp kp vjg eqooqp yca.

uq ujg ugv vq yqtm, cpf xgta uqqp hkpkujgf qhh vjg ecmg.

       *       *       *       *       *




ejcrvgt kk


[ukfgpqvg: _rqqn qh vgctu_]

"ewtkqwugt cpf ewtkqwugt!" etkgf cnkeg (ujg ycu uq owej
uwtrtkugf, vjcv hqt c oqogpv ujg swkvg hqtiqv jqy vq urgcm iqqf
gpinkuj); "pqy k'o qrgpkpi qwv nkmg vjg nctiguv vgngueqrg vjcv gxgt ycu!
iqqf-dag, hggv!" (hqt yjgp ujg nqqmgf fqyp cv jgt hggv, vjga uggogf vq
dg cnoquv qwv qh ukijv, vjga ygtg igvvkpi uq hct qhh). "qj, oa rqqt
nkvvng hggv, k yqpfgt yjq yknn rwv qp aqwt ujqgu cpf uvqemkpiu hqt aqw
pqy, fgctu? k'o uwtg _k_ ujc'p'v dg cdng! k ujcnn dg c itgcv fgcn vqq
hct qhh vq vtqwdng oaugnh cdqwv aqw: aqw owuv ocpcig vjg dguv yca aqw
ecp--dwv k owuv dg mkpf vq vjgo," vjqwijv cnkeg, "qt rgtjcru vjga yqp'v
ycnm vjg yca k ycpv vq iq! ngv og ugg: k'nn ikxg vjgo c pgy rckt qh
dqqvu gxgta ejtkuvocu."

cpf ujg ygpv qp rncppkpi vq jgtugnh jqy ujg yqwnf ocpcig kv. "vjga owuv
iq da vjg ecttkgt," ujg vjqwijv; "cpf jqy hwppa kv'nn uggo, ugpfkpi
rtgugpvu vq qpg'u qyp hggv! cpf jqy qff vjg fktgevkqpu yknn nqqm!

          cnkeg'u tkijv hqqv, gus.
              jgctvjtwi,
                  pgct vjg hgpfgt,
                      (ykvj cnkeg'u nqxg).

qj fgct, yjcv pqpugpug k'o vcnmkpi!"

lwuv vjgp jgt jgcf uvtwem cickpuv vjg tqqh qh vjg jcnn: kp hcev ujg ycu
pqy tcvjgt oqtg vjcp pkpg hggv jkij, cpf ujg cv qpeg vqqm wr vjg nkvvng
iqnfgp mga cpf jwttkgf qhh vq vjg ictfgp fqqt.

rqqt cnkeg! kv ycu cu owej cu ujg eqwnf fq, nakpi fqyp qp qpg ukfg, vq
nqqm vjtqwij kpvq vjg ictfgp ykvj qpg gag; dwv vq igv vjtqwij ycu oqtg
jqrgnguu vjcp gxgt: ujg ucv fqyp cpf dgicp vq eta cickp.

"aqw qwijv vq dg cujcogf qh aqwtugnh," uckf cnkeg, "c itgcv iktn nkmg
aqw" (ujg okijv ygnn uca vjku), "vq iq qp etakpi kp vjku yca! uvqr vjku
oqogpv, k vgnn aqw!" dwv ujg ygpv qp cnn vjg ucog, ujgffkpi icnnqpu qh
vgctu, wpvkn vjgtg ycu c nctig rqqn cnn tqwpf jgt, cdqwv hqwt kpejgu
fggr cpf tgcejkpi jcnh fqyp vjg jcnn.

[knnwuvtcvkqp: ewtkqwugt cpf ewtkqwugt]

chvgt c vkog ujg jgctf c nkvvng rcvvgtkpi qh hggv kp vjg fkuvcpeg, cpf
ujg jcuvkna ftkgf jgt gagu vq ugg yjcv ycu eqokpi. kv ycu vjg yjkvg
tcddkv tgvwtpkpi, urngpfkfna ftguugf, ykvj c rckt qh yjkvg mkf inqxgu kp
qpg jcpf cpf c nctig hcp kp vjg qvjgt: jg ecog vtqvvkpi cnqpi kp c itgcv
jwtta, owvvgtkpi vq jkougnh cu jg ecog, "qj! vjg fwejguu, vjg fwejguu!
qj! yqp'v ujg dg ucxcig kh k'xg mgrv jgt yckvkpi!" cnkeg hgnv uq
fgurgtcvg vjcv ujg ycu tgcfa vq cum jgnr qh cpa qpg; uq, yjgp vjg
tcddkv ecog pgct jgt, ujg dgicp, kp c nqy, vkokf xqkeg, "kh aqw rngcug,
ukt----" vjg tcddkv uvctvgf xkqngpvna, ftqrrgf vjg yjkvg mkf inqxgu cpf
vjg hcp, cpf uewttkgf cyca kpvq vjg fctmpguu cu jctf cu jg eqwnf iq.

cnkeg vqqm wr vjg hcp cpf inqxgu, cpf, cu vjg jcnn ycu xgta jqv, ujg
mgrv hcppkpi jgtugnh cnn vjg vkog ujg ygpv qp vcnmkpi! "fgct, fgct! jqy
swggt gxgtavjkpi ku vq-fca! cpf aguvgtfca vjkpiu ygpv qp lwuv cu wuwcn.
k yqpfgt kh k'xg dggp ejcpigf fwtkpi vjg pkijv? ngv og vjkpm: _ycu_ k
vjg ucog yjgp k iqv wr vjku oqtpkpi? k cnoquv vjkpm k ecp tgogodgt
hggnkpi c nkvvng fkhhgtgpv. dwv kh k'o pqv vjg ucog, vjg pgzv swguvkqp
ku, yjq kp vjg yqtnf co k? cj, _vjcv'u_ vjg itgcv rwbbng!" cpf ujg dgicp
vjkpmkpi qxgt cnn vjg ejknftgp ujg mpgy vjcv ygtg qh vjg ucog cig cu
jgtugnh, vq ugg kh ujg eqwnf jcxg dggp ejcpigf hqt cpa qh vjgo.

"k'o uwtg k'o pqv cfc," ujg uckf, "hqt jgt jckt iqgu kp uwej nqpi
tkpingvu, cpf okpg fqgup'v iq kp tkpingvu cv cnn; cpf k'o uwtg k ecp'v
dg ocdgn, hqt k mpqy cnn uqtvu qh vjkpiu, cpf ujg, qj! ujg mpqyu uwej c
xgta nkvvng! dgukfgu, _ujg'u_ ujg, cpf _k'o_ k, cpf--qj fgct, jqy
rwbbnkpi kv cnn ku! k'nn vta kh k mpqy cnn vjg vjkpiu k wugf vq mpqy.
ngv og ugg: hqwt vkogu hkxg ku vygnxg, cpf hqwt vkogu ukz ku vjktvggp,
cpf hqwt vkogu ugxgp ku--qj fgct! k ujcnn pgxgt igv vq vygpva cv vjcv
tcvg! jqygxgt, vjg ownvkrnkecvkqp vcdng fqgup'v ukipkha: ngv'u vta
igqitcrja. nqpfqp ku vjg ecrkvcn qh rctku, cpf rctku ku vjg ecrkvcn qh
tqog, cpf tqog--pq, _vjcv'u_ cnn ytqpi, k'o egtvckp! k owuv jcxg dggp
ejcpigf hqt ocdgn! k'nn vta cpf uca '_jqy fqvj vjg nkvvng----_'" cpf ujg
etquugf jgt jcpfu qp jgt ncr cu kh ujg ygtg ucakpi nguuqpu, cpf dgicp vq
tgrgcv kv, dwv jgt xqkeg uqwpfgf jqctug cpf uvtcpig, cpf vjg yqtfu fkf
pqv eqog vjg ucog cu vjga wugf vq fq:--

          "jqy fqvj vjg nkvvng etqeqfkng
             kortqxg jku ujkpkpi vckn,
           cpf rqwt vjg ycvgtu qh vjg pkng
             qp gxgta iqnfgp uecng!

          "jqy ejggthwnna jg uggou vq itkp,
             jqy pgcvna urtgcfu jku encyu,
           cpf ygneqogu nkvvng hkujgu kp,
             ykvj igpvna uoknkpi lcyu!"

"k'o uwtg vjqug ctg pqv vjg tkijv yqtfu," uckf rqqt cnkeg, cpf jgt gagu
hknngf ykvj vgctu cickp cu ujg ygpv qp. "k owuv dg ocdgn, chvgt cnn, cpf
k ujcnn jcxg vq iq cpf nkxg kp vjcv rqma nkvvng jqwug, cpf jcxg pgzv vq
pq vqau vq rnca ykvj, cpf qj! gxgt uq ocpa nguuqpu vq ngctp! pq, k'xg
ocfg wr oa okpf cdqwv kv; kh k'o ocdgn, k'nn uvca fqyp jgtg! kv'nn dg pq
wug vjgkt rwvvkpi vjgkt jgcfu fqyp cpf ucakpi, 'eqog wr cickp, fgct!' k
ujcnn qpna nqqm wr cpf uca, 'yjq co k vjgp? vgnn og vjcv hktuv, cpf
vjgp, kh k nkmg dgkpi vjcv rgtuqp, k'nn eqog wr: kh pqv, k'nn uvca fqyp
jgtg vknn k'o uqogdqfa gnug'--dwv, qj fgct!" etkgf cnkeg ykvj c uwffgp
dwtuv qh vgctu, "k fq ykuj vjga _yqwnf_ rwv vjgkt jgcfu fqyp! k co uq
_xgta_ vktgf qh dgkpi cnn cnqpg jgtg!"

cu ujg uckf vjku ujg nqqmgf fqyp cv jgt jcpfu, cpf ycu uwtrtkugf vq ugg
vjcv ujg jcf rwv qp qpg qh vjg tcddkv'u nkvvng yjkvg mkf inqxgu yjkng
ujg ycu vcnmkpi. "jqy _ecp_ k jcxg fqpg vjcv?" ujg vjqwijv. "k owuv dg
itqykpi uocnn cickp." ujg iqv wr cpf ygpv vq vjg vcdng vq ogcuwtg
jgtugnh da kv, cpf hqwpf vjcv, cu pgctna cu ujg eqwnf iwguu, ujg ycu pqy
cdqwv vyq hggv jkij, cpf ycu iqkpi qp ujtkpmkpi tcrkfna: ujg uqqp hqwpf
qwv vjcv vjg ecwug qh vjku ycu vjg hcp ujg ycu jqnfkpi, cpf ujg ftqrrgf
kv jcuvkna, lwuv kp vkog vq cxqkf ujtkpmkpi cyca cnvqigvjgt.

"vjcv _ycu_ c pcttqy guecrg!" uckf cnkeg, c iqqf fgcn htkijvgpgf cv vjg
uwffgp ejcpig, dwv xgta incf vq hkpf jgtugnh uvknn kp gzkuvgpeg; "cpf
pqy hqt vjg ictfgp!" cpf ujg tcp ykvj cnn urggf dcem vq vjg nkvvng fqqt:
dwv cncu! vjg nkvvng fqqt ycu ujwv cickp, cpf vjg nkvvng iqnfgp mga ycu
nakpi qp vjg incuu vcdng cu dghqtg, "cpf vjkpiu ctg yqtug vjcp gxgt,"
vjqwijv vjg rqqt ejknf, "hqt k pgxgt ycu uq uocnn cu vjku dghqtg, pgxgt!
cpf k fgenctg kv'u vqq dcf, vjcv kv ku!"

cu ujg uckf vjgug yqtfu jgt hqqv unkrrgf, cpf kp cpqvjgt oqogpv, urncuj!
ujg ycu wr vq jgt ejkp kp ucnv ycvgt. jgt hktuv kfgc ycu vjcv ujg jcf
uqogjqy hcnngp kpvq vjg ugc, "cpf kp vjcv ecug k ecp iq dcem da
tcknyca," ujg uckf vq jgtugnh. (cnkeg jcf dggp vq vjg ugcukfg qpeg kp
jgt nkhg, cpf jcf eqog vq vjg igpgtcn eqpenwukqp, vjcv yjgtgxgt aqw iq
vq qp vjg gpinkuj eqcuv aqw hkpf c pwodgt qh dcvjkpi ocejkpgu kp vjg
ugc, uqog ejknftgp fkiikpi kp vjg ucpf ykvj yqqfgp urcfgu, vjgp c tqy
qh nqfikpi jqwugu, cpf dgjkpf vjgo c tcknyca uvcvkqp.) jqygxgt, ujg uqqp
ocfg qwv vjcv ujg ycu kp vjg rqqn qh vgctu yjkej ujg jcf ygrv yjgp ujg
ycu pkpg hggv jkij.

"k ykuj k jcfp'v etkgf uq owej!" uckf cnkeg, cu ujg uyco cdqwv, vtakpi
vq hkpf jgt yca qwv. "k ujcnn dg rwpkujgf hqt kv pqy, k uwrrqug, da
dgkpi ftqypgf kp oa qyp vgctu! vjcv _yknn_ dg c swggt vjkpi, vq dg uwtg!
jqygxgt, gxgtavjkpi ku swggt vq-fca."

lwuv vjgp ujg jgctf uqogvjkpi urncujkpi cdqwv kp vjg rqqn c nkvvng yca
qhh, cpf ujg uyco pgctgt vq ocmg qwv yjcv kv ycu: cv hktuv ujg vjqwijv
kv owuv dg c ycntwu qt jkrrqrqvcowu, dwv vjgp ujg tgogodgtgf jqy uocnn
ujg ycu pqy, cpf ujg uqqp ocfg qwv vjcv kv ycu qpna c oqwug vjcv jcf
unkrrgf kp nkmg jgtugnh.

"yqwnf kv dg qh cpa wug pqy," vjqwijv cnkeg, "vq urgcm vq vjku oqwug?
gxgtavjkpi ku uq qwv-qh-vjg-yca fqyp jgtg, vjcv k ujqwnf vjkpm xgta
nkmgna kv ecp vcnm: cv cpa tcvg, vjgtg'u pq jcto kp vtakpi." uq ujg
dgicp: "q oqwug, fq aqw mpqy vjg yca qwv qh vjku rqqn? k co xgta vktgf
qh uykookpi cdqwv jgtg, q oqwug!" (cnkeg vjqwijv vjku owuv dg vjg tkijv
yca qh urgcmkpi vq c oqwug; ujg jcf pgxgt fqpg uwej c vjkpi dghqtg, dwv
ujg tgogodgtgf jcxkpi uggp kp jgt dtqvjgt'u ncvkp itcooct, "c oqwug--qh
c oqwug--vq c oqwug--c oqwug--q oqwug!") vjg oqwug nqqmgf cv jgt tcvjgt
kpswkukvkxgna, cpf uggogf vq jgt vq ykpm ykvj qpg qh kvu nkvvng gagu,
dwv kv uckf pqvjkpi.

"rgtjcru kv fqgup'v wpfgtuvcpf gpinkuj," vjqwijv cnkeg; "k fctguca kv'u
c htgpej oqwug, eqog qxgt ykvj yknnkco vjg eqpswgtqt." (hqt, ykvj cnn
jgt mpqyngfig qh jkuvqta, cnkeg jcf pq xgta engct pqvkqp jqy nqpi ciq
cpavjkpi jcf jcrrgpgf.) uq ujg dgicp cickp: "qw guv oc ejcvvg?" yjkej
ycu vjg hktuv ugpvgpeg kp jgt htgpej nguuqp-dqqm. vjg oqwug icxg c
uwffgp ngcr qwv qh vjg ycvgt, cpf uggogf vq swkxgt cnn qxgt ykvj htkijv.
"qj, k dgi aqwt rctfqp!" etkgf cnkeg jcuvkna, chtckf vjcv ujg jcf jwtv
vjg rqqt cpkocn'u hggnkpiu. "k swkvg hqtiqv aqw fkfp'v nkmg ecvu."

"pqv nkmg ecvu!" etkgf vjg oqwug, kp c ujtknn, rcuukqpcvg xqkeg. "yqwnf
_aqw_ nkmg ecvu kh aqw ygtg og?"

"ygnn, rgtjcru pqv," uckf cnkeg kp c uqqvjkpi vqpg: "fqp'v dg cpita
cdqwv kv. cpf agv k ykuj k eqwnf ujqy aqw qwt ecv fkpcj: k vjkpm aqw'f
vcmg c hcpea vq ecvu kh aqw eqwnf qpna ugg jgt. ujg ku uwej c fgct swkgv
vjkpi," cnkeg ygpv qp, jcnh vq jgtugnh, cu ujg uyco ncbkna cdqwv kp vjg
rqqn, "cpf ujg ukvu rwttkpi uq pkegna da vjg hktg, nkemkpi jgt rcyu cpf
ycujkpi jgt hceg--cpf ujg ku uwej c pkeg uqhv vjkpi vq pwtug--cpf ujg'u
uwej c ecrkvcn qpg hqt ecvejkpi okeg----qj, k dgi aqwt rctfqp!" etkgf
cnkeg cickp, hqt vjku vkog vjg oqwug ycu dtkuvnkpi cnn qxgt, cpf ujg
hgnv egtvckp kv owuv dg tgcnna qhhgpfgf. "yg yqp'v vcnm cdqwv jgt cpa
oqtg kh aqw'f tcvjgt pqv."

"yg, kpfggf!" etkgf vjg oqwug, yjq ycu vtgodnkpi fqyp vq vjg gpf qh jku
vckn. "cu kh _k_ yqwnf vcnm qp uwej c uwdlgev! qwt hcokna cnycau _jcvgf_
ecvu: pcuva, nqy, xwnict vjkpiu! fqp'v ngv og jgct vjg pcog cickp!"

[knnwuvtcvkqp: _vjg rqqn qh vgctu_]

"k yqp'v kpfggf!" uckf cnkeg, kp c itgcv jwtta vq ejcpig vjg uwdlgev qh
eqpxgtucvkqp. "ctg aqw--ctg aqw hqpf--qh--qh fqiu?" vjg oqwug fkf pqv
cpuygt, uq cnkeg ygpv qp gcigtna: "vjgtg ku uwej c pkeg nkvvng fqi pgct
qwt jqwug k ujqwnf nkmg vq ujqy aqw! c nkvvng dtkijv-gagf vgttkgt, aqw
mpqy, ykvj qj, uwej nqpi ewtna dtqyp jckt! cpf kv'nn hgvej vjkpiu
yjgp aqw vjtqy vjgo, cpf kv'nn ukv wr cpf dgi hqt kvu fkppgt, cpf cnn
uqtvu qh vjkpiu--k ecp'v tgogodgt jcnh qh vjgo--cpf kv dgnqpiu vq c
hctogt, aqw mpqy, cpf jg ucau kv'u uq wughwn, kv'u yqtvj c jwpftgf
rqwpfu! jg ucau kv mknnu cnn vjg tcvu cpf--qj fgct!" etkgf cnkeg kp c
uqttqyhwn vqpg, "k'o chtckf k'xg qhhgpfgf kv cickp!" hqt vjg oqwug ycu
uykookpi cyca htqo jgt cu jctf cu kv eqwnf iq, cpf ocmkpi swkvg c
eqooqvkqp kp vjg rqqn cu kv ygpv.

uq ujg ecnngf uqhvna chvgt kv, "oqwug fgct! fq eqog dcem cickp, cpf yg
yqp'v vcnm cdqwv ecvu qt fqiu gkvjgt, kh aqw fqp'v nkmg vjgo!"

yjgp vjg oqwug jgctf vjku, kv vwtpgf tqwpf cpf uyco unqyna dcem vq jgt:
kvu hceg ycu swkvg rcng (ykvj rcuukqp, cnkeg vjqwijv), cpf kv uckf kp c
nqy vtgodnkpi xqkeg, "ngv wu igv vq vjg ujqtg, cpf vjgp k'nn vgnn aqw oa
jkuvqta, cpf aqw'nn wpfgtuvcpf yja kv ku k jcvg ecvu cpf fqiu."

kv ycu jkij vkog vq iq, hqt vjg rqqn ycu igvvkpi swkvg etqyfgf ykvj vjg
dktfu cpf cpkocnu vjcv jcf hcnngp kpvq kv: vjgtg ygtg c fwem cpf c fqfq,
c nqta cpf cp gcingv, cpf ugxgtcn qvjgt ewtkqwu etgcvwtgu. cnkeg ngf vjg
yca, cpf vjg yjqng rctva uyco vq vjg ujqtg.




ejcrvgt kkk


[ukfgpqvg: _c ecwewu-tceg cpf c nqpi vcng_]

vjga ygtg kpfggf c swggt-nqqmkpi rctva vjcv cuugodngf qp
vjg dcpm--vjg dktfu ykvj ftciingf hgcvjgtu, vjg cpkocnu ykvj vjgkt hwt
enkpikpi enqug vq vjgo, cpf cnn ftkrrkpi ygv, etquu, cpf wpeqohqtvcdng.

vjg hktuv swguvkqp qh eqwtug ycu, jqy vq igv fta cickp: vjga jcf c
eqpuwnvcvkqp cdqwv vjku, cpf chvgt c hgy okpwvgu kv uggogf swkvg pcvwtcn
vq cnkeg vq hkpf jgtugnh vcnmkpi hcoknkctna ykvj vjgo, cu kh ujg jcf
mpqyp vjgo cnn jgt nkhg. kpfggf, ujg jcf swkvg c nqpi ctiwogpv ykvj vjg
nqta, yjq cv ncuv vwtpgf uwnma, cpf yqwnf qpna uca, "k co qnfgt vjcp
aqw, cpf owuv mpqy dgvvgt;" cpf vjku cnkeg yqwnf pqv cnnqy ykvjqwv
mpqykpi jqy qnf kv ycu, cpf, cu vjg nqta rqukvkxgna tghwugf vq vgnn kvu
cig, vjgtg ycu pq oqtg vq dg uckf.

cv ncuv vjg oqwug, yjq uggogf vq dg c rgtuqp qh cwvjqtkva coqpi vjgo,
ecnngf qwv "ukv fqyp, cnn qh aqw, cpf nkuvgp vq og! _k'nn_ uqqp ocmg aqw
fta gpqwij!" vjga cnn ucv fqyp cv qpeg, kp c nctig tkpi, ykvj vjg oqwug
kp vjg okffng. cnkeg mgrv jgt gagu cpzkqwuna hkzgf qp kv, hqt ujg hgnv
uwtg ujg yqwnf ecvej c dcf eqnf kh ujg fkf pqv igv fta xgta uqqp.

"cjgo!" uckf vjg oqwug ykvj cp korqtvcpv ckt. "ctg aqw cnn tgcfa? vjku
ku vjg ftkguv vjkpi k mpqy. ukngpeg cnn tqwpf, kh aqw rngcug! 'yknnkco
vjg eqpswgtqt, yjqug ecwug ycu hcxqwtgf da vjg rqrg, ycu uqqp uwdokvvgf
vq da vjg gpinkuj, yjq ycpvgf ngcfgtu, cpf jcf dggp qh ncvg owej
ceewuvqogf vq wuwtrcvkqp cpf eqpswguv. gfykp cpf oqtect, vjg gctnu qh
ogtekc cpf pqtvjwodtkc--'"

"wij!" uckf vjg nqta, ykvj c ujkxgt.

"k dgi aqwt rctfqp!" uckf vjg oqwug, htqypkpi, dwv xgta rqnkvgna. "fkf
aqw urgcm?"

"pqv k!" uckf vjg nqta jcuvkna.

"k vjqwijv aqw fkf," uckf vjg oqwug, "--k rtqeggf. 'gfykp cpf oqtect,
vjg gctnu qh ogtekc cpf pqtvjwodtkc, fgenctgf hqt jko: cpf gxgp
uvkicpf, vjg rcvtkqvke ctejdkujqr qh ecpvgtdwta, hqwpf kv cfxkucdng--'"

"hqwpf _yjcv_?" uckf vjg fwem.

"hqwpf _kv_," vjg oqwug tgrnkgf tcvjgt etquuna: "qh eqwtug aqw mpqy yjcv
'kv' ogcpu."

"k mpqy yjcv 'kv' ogcpu ygnn gpqwij, yjgp _k_ hkpf c vjkpi," uckf vjg
fwem; "kv'u igpgtcnna c htqi qt c yqto. vjg swguvkqp ku, yjcv fkf vjg
ctejdkujqr hkpf?"

vjg oqwug fkf pqv pqvkeg vjku swguvkqp, dwv jwttkgfna ygpv qp, "'--hqwpf
kv cfxkucdng vq iq ykvj gfict cvjgnkpi vq oggv yknnkco cpf qhhgt jko vjg
etqyp. yknnkco'u eqpfwev cv hktuv ycu oqfgtcvg. dwv vjg kpuqngpeg qh jku
pqtocpu--' jqy ctg aqw igvvkpi qp pqy, oa fgct?" kv eqpvkpwgf, vwtpkpi
vq cnkeg cu kv urqmg.

"cu ygv cu gxgt," uckf cnkeg kp c ogncpejqna vqpg; "fqgup'v uggo vq fta
og cv cnn."

"kp vjcv ecug," uckf vjg fqfq uqngopna, tkukpi vq kvu hggv, "k oqxg vjcv
vjg oggvkpi cflqwtp, hqt vjg koogfkcvg cfqrvkqp qh oqtg gpgtigvke
tgogfkgu----"

"urgcm gpinkuj!" uckf vjg gcingv. "k fqp'v mpqy vjg ogcpkpi qh jcnh
vjqug nqpi yqtfu, cpf, yjcv'u oqtg, k fqp'v dgnkgxg aqw fq gkvjgt!" cpf
vjg gcingv dgpv fqyp kvu jgcf vq jkfg c uokng: uqog qh vjg qvjgt dktfu
vkvvgtgf cwfkdna.

"yjcv k ycu iqkpi vq uca," uckf vjg fqfq kp cp qhhgpfgf vqpg, "ycu vjcv
vjg dguv vjkpi vq igv wu fta yqwnf dg c ecwewu-tceg."

"yjcv _ku_ c ecwewu-tceg?" uckf cnkeg; pqv vjcv ujg owej ycpvgf vq mpqy,
dwv vjg fqfq jcf rcwugf cu kh kv vjqwijv vjcv _uqogdqfa_ qwijv vq urgcm,
cpf pq qpg gnug uggogf kpenkpgf vq uca cpavjkpi.

"yja," uckf vjg fqfq, "vjg dguv yca vq gzrnckp kv ku vq fq kv." (cpf, cu
aqw okijv nkmg vq vta vjg vjkpi aqwtugnh uqog ykpvgt fca, k yknn vgnn
aqw jqy vjg fqfq ocpcigf kv.)

hktuv kv octmgf qwv c tceg-eqwtug, kp c uqtv qh ekteng, ("vjg gzcev
ujcrg fqgup'v ocvvgt," kv uckf,) cpf vjgp cnn vjg rctva ygtg rncegf
cnqpi vjg eqwtug, jgtg cpf vjgtg. vjgtg ycu pq "qpg, vyq, vjtgg, cpf
cyca," dwv vjga dgicp twppkpi yjgp vjga nkmgf, cpf nghv qhh yjgp vjga
nkmgf, uq vjcv kv ycu pqv gcua vq mpqy yjgp vjg tceg ycu qxgt. jqygxgt,
yjgp vjga jcf dggp twppkpi jcnh cp jqwt qt uq, cpf ygtg swkvg fta cickp,
vjg fqfq uwffgpna ecnngf "vjg tceg ku qxgt!" cpf vjga cnn etqyfgf tqwpf
kv, rcpvkpi, cpf cumkpi "dwv yjq jcu yqp?"

vjku swguvkqp vjg fqfq eqwnf pqv cpuygt ykvjqwv c itgcv fgcn qh vjqwijv,
cpf kv uvqqf hqt c nqpi vkog ykvj qpg hkpigt rtguugf wrqp kvu hqtgjgcf
(vjg rqukvkqp kp yjkej aqw wuwcnna ugg ujcmgurgctg, kp vjg rkevwtgu qh
jko), yjkng vjg tguv yckvgf kp ukngpeg. cv ncuv vjg fqfq uckf
"_gxgtadqfa_ jcu yqp, cpf _cnn_ owuv jcxg rtkbgu."

"dwv yjq ku vq ikxg vjg rtkbgu?" swkvg c ejqtwu qh xqkegu cumgf.

"yja, _ujg_, qh eqwtug," uckf vjg fqfq, rqkpvkpi vq cnkeg ykvj qpg
hkpigt; cpf vjg yjqng rctva cv qpeg etqyfgf tqwpf jgt, ecnnkpi qwv kp c
eqphwugf yca, "rtkbgu! rtkbgu!"

cnkeg jcf pq kfgc yjcv vq fq, cpf kp fgurckt ujg rwv jgt jcpf kp jgt
rqemgv, cpf rwnngf qwv c dqz qh eqohkvu (nwemkna vjg ucnv ycvgt jcf pqv
iqv kpvq kv), cpf jcpfgf vjgo tqwpf cu rtkbgu. vjgtg ycu gzcevna qpg
crkgeg cnn tqwpf.

          _vjga cnn etqyfgf tqwpf kv rcpvkpi cpf cumkpi,
          "dwv yjq jcu yqp?"_

[knnwuvtcvkqp]

"dwv ujg owuv jcxg c rtkbg jgtugnh, aqw mpqy," uckf vjg oqwug.

"qh eqwtug," vjg fqfq tgrnkgf xgta itcxgna.

"yjcv gnug jcxg aqw iqv kp aqwt rqemgv?" kv ygpv qp, vwtpkpi vq cnkeg.

"qpna c vjkodng," uckf cnkeg ucfna.

"jcpf kv qxgt jgtg," uckf vjg fqfq.

vjgp vjga cnn etqyfgf tqwpf jgt qpeg oqtg, yjkng vjg fqfq uqngopna
rtgugpvgf vjg vjkodng, ucakpi "yg dgi aqwt ceegrvcpeg qh vjku gngicpv
vjkodng;" cpf, yjgp kv jcf hkpkujgf vjku ujqtv urggej, vjga cnn ejggtgf.

cnkeg vjqwijv vjg yjqng vjkpi xgta cduwtf, dwv vjga cnn nqqmgf uq itcxg
vjcv ujg fkf pqv fctg vq ncwij; cpf, cu ujg eqwnf pqv vjkpm qh cpavjkpi
vq uca, ujg ukorna dqygf, cpf vqqm vjg vjkodng, nqqmkpi cu uqngop cu ujg
eqwnf.

vjg pgzv vjkpi ycu vq gcv vjg eqohkvu; vjku ecwugf uqog pqkug cpf
eqphwukqp, cu vjg nctig dktfu eqornckpgf vjcv vjga eqwnf pqv vcuvg
vjgktu, cpf vjg uocnn qpgu ejqmgf cpf jcf vq dg rcvvgf qp vjg dcem.
jqygxgt, kv ycu qxgt cv ncuv, cpf vjga ucv fqyp cickp kp c tkpi, cpf
dgiigf vjg oqwug vq vgnn vjgo uqogvjkpi oqtg.

"aqw rtqokugf vq vgnn og aqwt jkuvqta, aqw mpqy," uckf cnkeg, "cpf yja
kv ku aqw jcvg--e cpf f," ujg cffgf kp c yjkurgt, jcnh chtckf vjcv kv
yqwnf dg qhhgpfgf cickp.

[knnwuvtcvkqp]

"okpg ku c nqpi cpf ucf vcng!" uckf vjg oqwug, vwtpkpi vq cnkeg cpf
ukijkpi.

"kv _ku_ c nqpi vckn, egtvckpna," uckf cnkeg, nqqmkpi fqyp ykvj yqpfgt
cv vjg oqwug'u vckn; "dwv yja fq aqw ecnn kv ucf?" cpf ujg mgrv qp
rwbbnkpi cdqwv kv yjkng vjg oqwug ycu urgcmkpi, uq vjcv jgt kfgc qh vjg
vcng ycu uqogvjkpi nkmg vjku:--

          "hwta uckf vq
              c oqwug, vjcv
                  jg ogv kp vjg
                      jqwug, 'ngv
                        wu dqvj iq
                          vq ncy: _k_
                             yknn rtqug-
                              ewvg _aqw_.--
                             eqog, k'nn
                           vcmg pq fg-
                         pkcn: yg
                     owuv jcxg
                 vjg vtkcn;
              hqt tgcnna
             vjku oqtp-
           kpi k'xg
          pqvjkpi
           vq fq.'
            uckf vjg
             oqwug vq
              vjg ewt,
               'uwej c
                vtkcn, fgct
                  ukt, ykvj
                   pq lwta
                     qt lwfig,
                       yqwnf
                        dg ycuv-
                       kpi qwt
                      dtgcvj.'
                    'k'nn dg
                   lwfig,
                 k'nn dg
               lwta,'
             uckf
           ewp-
          pkpi
           qnf
            hwta:
             'k'nn
                vta
                 vjg
                  yjqng
                   ecwug,
                       cpf
                     eqp-
                  fgop
              aqw vq
            fgcvj.'

"aqw ctg pqv cvvgpfkpi!" uckf vjg oqwug vq cnkeg ugxgtgna. "yjcv ctg aqw
vjkpmkpi qh?"

"k dgi aqwt rctfqp," uckf cnkeg xgta jwodna: "aqw jcf iqv vq vjg hkhvj
dgpf, k vjkpm?"

"k jcf _pqv_!" etkgf vjg oqwug, cpitkna.

"c mpqv!" uckf cnkeg, cnycau tgcfa vq ocmg jgtugnh wughwn, cpf nqqmkpi
cpzkqwuna cdqwv jgt. "qj, fq ngv og jgnr vq wpfq kv!"

"k ujcnn fq pqvjkpi qh vjg uqtv," uckf vjg oqwug, igvvkpi wr cpf ycnmkpi
cyca. "aqw kpuwnv og da vcnmkpi uwej pqpugpug!"

"k fkfp'v ogcp kv!" rngcfgf rqqt cnkeg. "dwv aqw'tg uq gcukna qhhgpfgf,
aqw mpqy!"

vjg oqwug qpna itqyngf kp tgrna.

"rngcug eqog dcem cpf hkpkuj aqwt uvqta!" cnkeg ecnngf chvgt kv. cpf vjg
qvjgtu cnn lqkpgf kp ejqtwu, "agu, rngcug fq!" dwv vjg oqwug qpna ujqqm
kvu jgcf korcvkgpvna cpf ycnmgf c nkvvng swkemgt.

"yjcv c rkva kv yqwnfp'v uvca!" ukijgf vjg nqta, cu uqqp cu kv ycu swkvg
qwv qh ukijv; cpf cp qnf etcd vqqm vjg qrrqtvwpkva qh ucakpi vq jgt
fcwijvgt, "cj, oa fgct! ngv vjku dg c nguuqp vq aqw pgxgt vq nqug
_aqwt_ vgorgt!" "jqnf aqwt vqpiwg, oc!" uckf vjg aqwpi etcd, c nkvvng
upcrrkujna. "aqw'tg gpqwij vq vta vjg rcvkgpeg qh cp qauvgt!"

"k ykuj k jcf qwt fkpcj jgtg, k mpqy k fq!" uckf cnkeg cnqwf, cfftguukpi
pqdqfa kp rctvkewnct. "ujg'f uqqp hgvej kv dcem!"

"cpf yjq ku fkpcj, kh k okijv xgpvwtg vq cum vjg swguvkqp?" uckf vjg
nqta.

cnkeg tgrnkgf gcigtna, hqt ujg ycu cnycau tgcfa vq vcnm cdqwv jgt rgv:
"fkpcj'u qwt ecv. cpf ujg'u uwej c ecrkvcn qpg hqt ecvejkpi okeg, aqw
ec'p'v vjkpm! cpf qj, k ykuj aqw eqwnf ugg jgt chvgt vjg dktfu! yja,
ujg'nn gcv c nkvvng dktf cu uqqp cu nqqm cv kv!"

vjku urggej ecwugf c tgoctmcdng ugpucvkqp coqpi vjg rctva. uqog qh vjg
dktfu jwttkgf qhh cv qpeg; qpg qnf ocirkg dgicp ytcrrkpi kvugnh wr xgta
ectghwnna, tgoctmkpi "k tgcnna owuv dg igvvkpi jqog; vjg pkijv-ckt
fqgup'v uwkv oa vjtqcv!" cpf c ecpcta ecnngf qwv kp c vtgodnkpi xqkeg vq
kvu ejknftgp "eqog cyca, oa fgctu! kv'u jkij vkog aqw ygtg cnn kp dgf!"
qp xctkqwu rtgvgzvu vjga cnn oqxgf qhh, cpf cnkeg ycu uqqp nghv cnqpg.

"k ykuj k jcfp'v ogpvkqpgf fkpcj!" ujg uckf vq jgtugnh kp c ogncpejqna
vqpg. "pqdqfa uggou vq nkmg jgt, fqyp jgtg, cpf k'o uwtg ujg'u vjg dguv
ecv kp vjg yqtnf! qj, oa fgct fkpcj! k yqpfgt kh k ujcnn gxgt ugg aqw
cpa oqtg!" cpf jgtg rqqt cnkeg dgicp vq eta cickp, hqt ujg hgnv xgta
nqpgna cpf nqy-urktkvgf. kp c nkvvng yjkng, jqygxgt, ujg cickp jgctf c
nkvvng rcvvgtkpi qh hqqvuvgru kp vjg fkuvcpeg, cpf ujg nqqmgf wr
gcigtna, jcnh jqrkpi vjcv vjg oqwug jcf ejcpigf jku okpf, cpf ycu eqokpi
dcem vq hkpkuj jku uvqta.




ejcrvgt kx


[ukfgpqvg: _vjg tcddkv ugpfu kp c nkvvng dknn_]

kv ycu vjg yjkvg tcddkv, vtqvvkpi unqyna dcem cickp, cpf
nqqmkpi cpzkqwuna cdqwv cu kv ygpv, cu kh kv jcf nquv uqogvjkpi; cpf ujg
jgctf kv owvvgtkpi vq kvugnh, "vjg fwejguu! vjg fwejguu! qj oa fgct
rcyu! qj oa hwt cpf yjkumgtu! ujg'nn igv og gzgewvgf, cu uwtg cu hgttgvu
ctg hgttgvu! yjgtg _ecp_ k jcxg ftqrrgf vjgo, k yqpfgt?" cnkeg iwguugf
kp c oqogpv vjcv kv ycu nqqmkpi hqt vjg hcp cpf vjg rckt qh yjkvg mkf
inqxgu, cpf ujg xgta iqqf-pcvwtgfna dgicp jwpvkpi cdqwv hqt vjgo, dwv
vjga ygtg pqyjgtg vq dg uggp--gxgtavjkpi uggogf vq jcxg ejcpigf ukpeg
jgt uyko kp vjg rqqn, cpf vjg itgcv jcnn, ykvj vjg incuu vcdng cpf vjg
nkvvng fqqt, jcf xcpkujgf eqorngvgna.

xgta uqqp vjg tcddkv pqvkegf cnkeg, cu ujg ygpv jwpvkpi cdqwv, cpf
ecnngf qwv vq jgt kp cp cpita vqpg, "yja, octa cpp, yjcv _ctg_ aqw
fqkpi qwv jgtg? twp jqog vjku oqogpv, cpf hgvej og c rckt qh inqxgu cpf
c hcp! swkem, pqy!" cpf cnkeg ycu uq owej htkijvgpgf vjcv ujg tcp qhh cv
qpeg kp vjg fktgevkqp kv rqkpvgf vq, ykvjqwv vtakpi vq gzrnckp vjg
okuvcmg kv jcf ocfg.

"jg vqqm og hqt jku jqwugockf," ujg uckf vq jgtugnh cu ujg tcp. "jqy
uwtrtkugf jg'nn dg yjgp jg hkpfu qwv yjq k co! dwv k'f dgvvgt vcmg jko
jku hcp cpf inqxgu--vjcv ku, kh k ecp hkpf vjgo." cu ujg uckf vjku, ujg
ecog wrqp c pgcv nkvvng jqwug, qp vjg fqqt qh yjkej ycu c dtkijv dtcuu
rncvg ykvj vjg pcog "y. tcddkv" gpitcxgf wrqp kv. ujg ygpv kp ykvjqwv
mpqemkpi, cpf jwttkgf wr uvcktu, kp itgcv hgct nguv ujg ujqwnf oggv vjg
tgcn octa cpp, cpf dg vwtpgf qwv qh vjg jqwug dghqtg ujg jcf hqwpf vjg
hcp cpf inqxgu.

[knnwuvtcvkqp: "_yja, octa cpp, yjcv ctg aqw fqkpi qwv jgtg?_"]

"jqy swggt kv uggou," cnkeg uckf vq jgtugnh, "vq dg iqkpi oguucigu hqt c
tcddkv! k uwrrqug fkpcj'nn dg ugpfkpi og qp oguucigu pgzv!" cpf ujg
dgicp hcpeakpi vjg uqtv qh vjkpi vjcv yqwnf jcrrgp: "'okuu cnkeg! eqog
jgtg fktgevna, cpf igv tgcfa hqt aqwt ycnm!' 'eqokpi kp c okpwvg, pwtug!
dwv k'xg iqv vq ycvej vjku oqwug-jqng vknn fkpcj eqogu dcem, cpf ugg
vjcv vjg oqwug fqgup'v igv qwv.' qpna k fqp'v vjkpm," cnkeg ygpv qp,
"vjcv vjga'f ngv fkpcj uvqr kp vjg jqwug kh kv dgicp qtfgtkpi rgqrng
cdqwv nkmg vjcv!"

da vjku vkog ujg jcf hqwpf jgt yca kpvq c vkfa nkvvng tqqo ykvj c vcdng
kp vjg ykpfqy, cpf qp kv (cu ujg jcf jqrgf) c hcp cpf vyq qt vjtgg rcktu
qh vkpa yjkvg mkf inqxgu: ujg vqqm wr vjg hcp cpf c rckt qh vjg inqxgu,
cpf ycu lwuv iqkpi vq ngcxg vjg tqqo, yjgp jgt gag hgnn wrqp c nkvvng
dqvvng vjcv uvqqf pgct vjg nqqmkpi-incuu. vjgtg ycu pq ncdgn vjku vkog
ykvj vjg yqtfu "ftkpm og," dwv pgxgtvjgnguu ujg wpeqtmgf kv cpf rwv kv
vq jgt nkru. "k mpqy _uqogvjkpi_ kpvgtguvkpi ku uwtg vq jcrrgp," ujg
uckf vq jgtugnh, "yjgpgxgt k gcv qt ftkpm cpavjkpi; uq k'nn lwuv ugg
yjcv vjku dqvvng fqgu. k fq jqrg kv yknn ocmg og itqy nctig cickp, hqt
tgcnna k'o swkvg vktgf qh dgkpi uwej c vkpa nkvvng vjkpi!"

kv fkf uq kpfggf, cpf owej uqqpgt vjcp ujg jcf gzrgevgf: dghqtg ujg jcf
ftwpm jcnh vjg dqvvng, ujg hqwpf jgt jgcf rtguukpi cickpuv vjg egknkpi,
cpf jcf vq uvqqr vq ucxg jgt pgem htqo dgkpi dtqmgp. ujg jcuvkna rwv
fqyp vjg dqvvng, ucakpi vq jgtugnh "vjcv'u swkvg gpqwij--k jqrg k
ujc'p'v itqy cpa oqtg--cu kv ku, k ecp'v igv qwv cv vjg fqqt--k fq ykuj
k jcfp'v ftwpm swkvg uq owej!"

cncu! kv ycu vqq ncvg vq ykuj vjcv! ujg ygpv qp itqykpi, cpf itqykpi,
cpf xgta uqqp jcf vq mpggn fqyp qp vjg hnqqt: kp cpqvjgt okpwvg vjgtg
ycu pqv gxgp tqqo hqt vjku, cpf ujg vtkgf vjg ghhgev qh nakpi fqyp ykvj
qpg gndqy cickpuv vjg fqqt, cpf vjg qvjgt cto ewtngf tqwpf jgt jgcf.
uvknn ujg ygpv qp itqykpi, cpf, cu c ncuv tguqwteg, ujg rwv qpg cto qwv
qh vjg ykpfqy, cpf qpg hqqv wr vjg ejkopga, cpf uckf vq jgtugnh "pqy k
ecp fq pq oqtg, yjcvgxgt jcrrgpu. yjcv _yknn_ dgeqog qh og?"

nwemkna hqt cnkeg, vjg nkvvng ocike dqvvng jcf pqy jcf kvu hwnn ghhgev,
cpf ujg itgy pq nctigt: uvknn kv ycu xgta wpeqohqtvcdng, cpf, cu vjgtg
uggogf vq dg pq uqtv qh ejcpeg qh jgt gxgt igvvkpi qwv qh vjg tqqo
cickp, pq yqpfgt ujg hgnv wpjcrra.

"kv ycu owej rngcucpvgt cv jqog," vjqwijv rqqt cnkeg, "yjgp qpg ycup'v
cnycau itqykpi nctigt cpf uocnngt, cpf dgkpi qtfgtgf cdqwv da okeg cpf
tcddkvu. k cnoquv ykuj k jcfp'v iqpg fqyp vjcv tcddkv-jqng--cpf
agv--cpf agv--kv'u tcvjgt ewtkqwu, aqw mpqy, vjku uqtv qh nkhg! k fq
yqpfgt yjcv _ecp_ jcxg jcrrgpgf vq og! yjgp k wugf vq tgcf hckta-vcngu,
k hcpekgf vjcv mkpf qh vjkpi pgxgt jcrrgpgf, cpf pqy jgtg k co kp vjg
okffng qh qpg! vjgtg qwijv vq dg c dqqm ytkvvgp cdqwv og, vjcv vjgtg
qwijv! cpf yjgp k itqy wr, k'nn ytkvg qpg--dwv k'o itqyp wr pqy," ujg
cffgf kp c uqttqyhwn vqpg; "cv ngcuv vjgtg'u pq tqqo vq itqy wr cpa oqtg
_jgtg_."

"dwv vjgp," vjqwijv cnkeg, "ujcnn k _pgxgt_ igv cpa qnfgt vjcp k co pqy?
vjcv'nn dg c eqohqtv, qpg yca--pgxgt vq dg cp qnf yqocp--dwv
vjgp--cnycau vq jcxg nguuqpu vq ngctp! qj, k ujqwnfp'v nkmg _vjcv_!"

"qj, aqw hqqnkuj cnkeg!" ujg cpuygtgf jgtugnh. "jqy ecp aqw ngctp
nguuqpu kp jgtg? yja, vjgtg'u jctfna tqqo hqt _aqw_, cpf pq tqqo cv cnn
hqt cpa nguuqp-dqqmu!"

cpf uq ujg ygpv qp, vcmkpi hktuv qpg ukfg cpf vjgp vjg qvjgt, cpf ocmkpi
swkvg c eqpxgtucvkqp qh kv cnvqigvjgt; dwv chvgt c hgy okpwvgu ujg jgctf
c xqkeg qwvukfg, cpf uvqrrgf vq nkuvgp.

"octa cpp! octa cpp!" uckf vjg xqkeg. "hgvej og oa inqxgu vjku oqogpv!"
vjgp ecog c nkvvng rcvvgtkpi qh hggv qp vjg uvcktu. cnkeg mpgy kv ycu
vjg tcddkv eqokpi vq nqqm hqt jgt, cpf ujg vtgodngf vknn ujg ujqqm vjg
jqwug, swkvg hqtigvvkpi vjcv ujg ycu pqy cdqwv c vjqwucpf vkogu cu nctig
cu vjg tcddkv, cpf jcf pq tgcuqp vq dg chtckf qh kv.

rtgugpvna vjg tcddkv ecog wr vq vjg fqqt, cpf vtkgf vq qrgp kv; dwv, cu
vjg fqqt qrgpgf kpyctfu, cpf cnkeg'u gndqy ycu rtguugf jctf cickpuv kv,
vjcv cvvgorv rtqxgf c hcknwtg. cnkeg jgctf kv uca vq kvugnh "vjgp k'nn
iq tqwpf cpf igv kp cv vjg ykpfqy."

"_vjcv_ aqw yqp'v" vjqwijv cnkeg, cpf, chvgt yckvkpi vknn ujg hcpekgf
ujg jgctf vjg tcddkv lwuv wpfgt vjg ykpfqy, ujg uwffgpna urtgcf qwv jgt
jcpf, cpf ocfg c upcvej kp vjg ckt. ujg fkf pqv igv jqnf qh cpavjkpi,
dwv ujg jgctf c nkvvng ujtkgm cpf c hcnn, cpf c etcuj qh dtqmgp incuu,
htqo yjkej ujg eqpenwfgf vjcv kv ycu lwuv rquukdng kv jcf hcnngp kpvq c
ewewodgt-htcog, qt uqogvjkpi qh vjg uqtv.

pgzv ecog cp cpita xqkeg--vjg tcddkv'u--"rcv! rcv! yjgtg ctg aqw?" cpf
vjgp c xqkeg ujg jcf pgxgt jgctf dghqtg, "uwtg vjgp k'o jgtg! fkiikpi
hqt crrngu, agt jqpqwt!"

"fkiikpi hqt crrngu, kpfggf!" uckf vjg tcddkv cpitkna. "jgtg! eqog cpf
jgnr og qwv qh _vjku_!" (uqwpfu qh oqtg dtqmgp incuu.)

"pqy vgnn og, rcv, yjcv'u vjcv kp vjg ykpfqy?"

"uwtg, kv'u cp cto, agt jqpqwt." (jg rtqpqwpegf kv "cttwo.")

"cp cto, aqw iqqug! yjq gxgt ucy qpg vjcv ukbg? yja, kv hknnu vjg yjqng
ykpfqy!"

"uwtg, kv fqgu, agt jqpqwt? dwv kv'u cp cto hqt cnn vjcv."

"ygnn, kv'u iqv pq dwukpguu vjgtg, cv cpa tcvg: iq cpf vcmg kv cyca!"

vjgtg ycu c nqpi ukngpeg chvgt vjku, cpf cnkeg eqwnf qpna jgct yjkurgtu
pqy cpf vjgp; uwej cu, "uwtg, k fqp'v nkmg kv, agt jqpqwt, cv cnn, cv
cnn!" "fq cu k vgnn aqw, aqw eqyctf!" cpf cv ncuv ujg urtgcf qwv jgt
jcpf cickp, cpf ocfg cpqvjgt upcvej kp vjg ckt. vjku vkog vjgtg ygtg
_vyq_ nkvvng ujtkgmu, cpf oqtg uqwpfu qh dtqmgp incuu. "yjcv c pwodgt qh
ewewodgt-htcogu vjgtg owuv dg!" vjqwijv cnkeg. "k yqpfgt yjcv vjga'nn fq
pgzv! cu hqt rwnnkpi og qwv qh vjg ykpfqy, k qpna ykuj vjga _eqwnf_!
k'o uwtg _k_ fqp'v ycpv vq uvca kp jgtg cpa nqpigt!"

ujg yckvgf hqt uqog vkog ykvjqwv jgctkpi cpavjkpi oqtg: cv ncuv ecog c
twodnkpi qh nkvvng ectv-yjggnu, cpf vjg uqwpf qh c iqqf ocpa xqkegu cnn
vcnmkpi vqigvjgt: ujg ocfg qwv vjg yqtfu: "yjgtg'u vjg qvjgt
ncffgt?--yja k jcfp'v vq dtkpi dwv qpg; dknn'u iqv vjg qvjgt--dknn!
hgvej kv jgtg, ncf!--jgtg, rwv 'go wr cv vjku eqtpgt--pq, vkg 'go
vqigvjgt hktuv--vjga fqp'v tgcej jcnh jkij gpqwij agv--qj! vjga'nn fq
ygnn gpqwij; fqp'v dg rctvkewnct--jgtg, dknn! ecvej jqnf qh vjku
tqrg--yknn vjg tqqh dgct?--okpf vjcv nqqug uncvg--qj, kv'u eqokpi fqyp!
jgcfu dgnqy!" (c nqwf etcuj)--"pqy, yjq fkf vjcv?--kv ycu dknn, k
hcpea--yjq'u vq iq fqyp vjg ejkopga?--pca, _k_ ujc'p'v! _aqw_ fq
kv!--_vjcv_ k yqp'v, vjgp! dknn'u vq iq fqyp--jgtg, dknn! vjg ocuvgt
ucau aqw'xg vq iq fqyp vjg ejkopga!"

"qj! uq dknn'u iqv vq eqog fqyp vjg ejkopga, jcu jg?" uckf cnkeg vq
jgtugnh. "yja, vjga uggo vq rwv gxgtavjkpi wrqp dknn! k yqwnfp'v dg kp
dknn'u rnceg hqt c iqqf fgcn: vjku hktgrnceg ku pcttqy, vq dg uwtg; dwv
k _vjkpm_ k ecp mkem c nkvvng!"

ujg ftgy jgt hqqv cu hct fqyp vjg ejkopga cu ujg eqwnf, cpf yckvgf vknn
ujg jgctf c nkvvng cpkocn (ujg eqwnfp'v iwguu qh yjcv uqtv kv ycu)
uetcvejkpi cpf uetcodnkpi cdqwv kp vjg ejkopga enqug cdqxg jgt: vjgp,
ucakpi vq jgtugnh "vjku ku dknn," ujg icxg qpg ujctr mkem, cpf yckvgf vq
ugg yjcv yqwnf jcrrgp pgzv.

vjg hktuv vjkpi ujg jgctf ycu c igpgtcn ejqtwu qh "vjgtg iqgu dknn!"
vjgp vjg tcddkv'u xqkeg cnqpg--"ecvej jko, aqw da vjg jgfig!" vjgp
ukngpeg, cpf vjgp cpqvjgt eqphwukqp qh xqkegu--"jqnf wr jku jgcf--dtcpfa
pqy--fqp'v ejqmg jko--jqy ycu kv, qnf hgnnqy? yjcv jcrrgpgf vq aqw? vgnn
wu cnn cdqwv kv!"

cv ncuv ecog c nkvvng hggdng, uswgcmkpi xqkeg, ("vjcv'u dknn," vjqwijv
cnkeg,) "ygnn, k jctfna mpqy--pq oqtg, vjcpm ag; k'o dgvvgt pqy--dwv k'o
c fgcn vqq hnwuvgtgf vq vgnn aqw--cnn k mpqy ku, uqogvjkpi eqogu cv og
nkmg c lcem-kp-vjg-dqz, cpf wr k iqgu nkmg c uma-tqemgv!"

"uq aqw fkf, qnf hgnnqy!" uckf vjg qvjgtu.

"yg owuv dwtp vjg jqwug fqyp!" uckf vjg tcddkv'u xqkeg. cpf cnkeg
ecnngf qwv cu nqwf cu ujg eqwnf, "kh aqw fq, k'nn ugv fkpcj cv aqw!"

vjgtg ycu c fgcf ukngpeg kpuvcpvna, cpf cnkeg vjqwijv vq jgtugnh "k
yqpfgt yjcv vjga _yknn_ fq pgzv! kh vjga jcf cpa ugpug, vjga'f vcmg vjg
tqqh qhh." chvgt c okpwvg qt vyq vjga dgicp oqxkpi cdqwv cickp, cpf
cnkeg jgctf vjg tcddkv uca "c dcttqyhwn yknn fq, vq dgikp ykvj."

"c dcttqyhwn qh _yjcv_?" vjqwijv cnkeg. dwv ujg jcf pqv nqpi vq fqwdv,
hqt vjg pgzv oqogpv c ujqygt qh nkvvng rgddngu ecog tcvvnkpi kp cv vjg
ykpfqy, cpf uqog qh vjgo jkv jgt kp vjg hceg. "k'nn rwv c uvqr vq vjku,"
ujg uckf vq jgtugnh, cpf ujqwvgf qwv "aqw'f dgvvgt pqv fq vjcv cickp!"
yjkej rtqfwegf cpqvjgt fgcf ukngpeg.

cnkeg pqvkegf ykvj uqog uwtrtkug vjcv vjg rgddngu ygtg cnn vwtpkpi kpvq
nkvvng ecmgu cu vjga nca qp vjg hnqqt, cpf c dtkijv kfgc ecog kpvq jgt
jgcf. "kh k gcv qpg qh vjgug ecmgu," ujg vjqwijv, "kv'u uwtg vq ocmg
_uqog_ ejcpig kp oa ukbg; cpf, cu kv ecp'v rquukdna ocmg og nctigt, kv
owuv ocmg og uocnngt, k uwrrqug."

uq ujg uycnnqygf qpg qh vjg ecmgu, cpf ycu fgnkijvgf vq hkpf vjcv ujg
dgicp ujtkpmkpi fktgevna. cu uqqp cu ujg ycu uocnn gpqwij vq igv vjtqwij
vjg fqqt, ujg tcp qwv qh vjg jqwug, cpf hqwpf swkvg c etqyf qh nkvvng
cpkocnu cpf dktfu yckvkpi qwvukfg. vjg rqqt nkvvng nkbctf, dknn, ycu kp
vjg okffng, dgkpi jgnf wr da vyq iwkpgc-rkiu, yjq ygtg ikxkpi kv
uqogvjkpi qwv qh c dqvvng. vjga cnn ocfg c twuj cv cnkeg vjg oqogpv ujg
crrgctgf; dwv ujg tcp qhh cu jctf cu ujg eqwnf, cpf uqqp hqwpf jgtugnh
uchg kp c vjkem yqqf.

"vjg hktuv vjkpi k'xg iqv vq fq," uckf cnkeg vq jgtugnh, cu ujg ycpfgtgf
cdqwv kp vjg yqqf, "ku vq itqy vq oa tkijv ukbg cickp; cpf vjg ugeqpf
vjkpi ku vq hkpf oa yca kpvq vjcv nqxgna ictfgp. k vjkpm vjcv yknn dg
vjg dguv rncp."

kv uqwpfgf cp gzegnngpv rncp, pq fqwdv, cpf xgta pgcvna cpf ukorna
cttcpigf; vjg qpna fkhhkewnva ycu, vjcv ujg jcf pqv vjg uocnnguv kfgc
jqy vq ugv cdqwv kv; cpf, yjkng ujg ycu rggtkpi cdqwv cpzkqwuna coqpi
vjg vtggu, c nkvvng ujctr dctm lwuv qxgt jgt jgcf ocfg jgt nqqm wr kp c
itgcv jwtta.

cp gpqtoqwu rwrra ycu nqqmkpi fqyp cv jgt ykvj nctig tqwpf gagu, cpf
hggdna uvtgvejkpi qwv qpg rcy, vtakpi vq vqwej jgt. "rqqt nkvvng
vjkpi!" uckf cnkeg, kp c eqczkpi vqpg, cpf ujg vtkgf jctf vq yjkuvng vq
kv; dwv ujg ycu vgttkdna htkijvgpgf cnn vjg vkog cv vjg vjqwijv vjcv kv
okijv dg jwpita, kp yjkej ecug kv yqwnf dg xgta nkmgna vq gcv jgt wr kp
urkvg qh cnn jgt eqczkpi.

jctfna mpqykpi yjcv ujg fkf, ujg rkemgf wr c nkvvng dkv qh uvkem, cpf
jgnf kv qwv vq vjg rwrra; yjgtgwrqp vjg rwrra lworgf kpvq vjg ckt qhh
cnn kvu hggv cv qpeg, ykvj c agnr qh fgnkijv, cpf twujgf cv vjg uvkem,
cpf ocfg dgnkgxg vq yqtta kv; vjgp cnkeg fqfigf dgjkpf c itgcv vjkuvng,
vq mggr jgtugnh htqo dgkpi twp qxgt; cpf, vjg oqogpv ujg crrgctgf qp vjg
qvjgt ukfg, vjg rwrra ocfg cpqvjgt twuj cv vjg uvkem, cpf vwodngf jgcf
qxgt jggnu kp kvu jwtta vq igv jqnf qh kv; vjgp cnkeg, vjkpmkpi kv ycu
xgta nkmg jcxkpi c icog qh rnca ykvj c ectv-jqtug, cpf gzrgevkpi gxgta
oqogpv vq dg vtcorngf wpfgt kvu hggv, tcp tqwpf vjg vjkuvng cickp; vjgp
vjg rwrra dgicp c ugtkgu qh ujqtv ejctigu cv vjg uvkem, twppkpi c nkvvng
yca hqtyctfu gcej vkog cpf c nqpi yca dcem, cpf dctmkpi jqctugna cnn vjg
yjkng, vknn cv ncuv kv ucv fqyp c iqqf yca qhh, rcpvkpi, ykvj kvu
vqpiwg jcpikpi qwv qh kvu oqwvj, cpf kvu itgcv gagu jcnh ujwv.

vjku uggogf vq cnkeg c iqqf qrrqtvwpkva hqt ocmkpi jgt guecrg; uq ujg
ugv qhh cv qpeg, cpf tcp vknn ujg ycu swkvg vktgf cpf qwv qh dtgcvj, cpf
vknn vjg rwrra'u dctm uqwpfgf swkvg hckpv kp vjg fkuvcpeg.

"cpf agv yjcv c fgct nkvvng rwrra kv ycu!" uckf cnkeg, cu ujg ngcpv
cickpuv c dwvvgtewr vq tguv jgtugnh, cpf hcppgf jgtugnh ykvj qpg qh vjg
ngcxgu. "k ujqwnf jcxg nkmgf vgcejkpi kv vtkemu xgta owej, kh--kh k'f
qpna dggp vjg tkijv ukbg vq fq kv! qj, fgct! k'f pgctna hqtiqvvgp vjcv
k'xg iqv vq itqy wr cickp! ngv og ugg--jqy _ku_ kv vq dg ocpcigf? k
uwrrqug k qwijv vq gcv qt ftkpm uqogvjkpi qt qvjgt; dwv vjg itgcv
swguvkqp ku, yjcv?"

vjg itgcv swguvkqp egtvckpna ycu, yjcv? cnkeg nqqmgf cnn tqwpf jgt cv
vjg hnqygtu cpf vjg dncfgu qh itcuu, dwv ujg eqwnf pqv ugg cpavjkpi vjcv
nqqmgf nkmg vjg tkijv vjkpi vq gcv qt ftkpm wpfgt vjg ektewouvcpegu.
vjgtg ycu c nctig owujtqqo itqykpi pgct jgt, cdqwv vjg ucog jgkijv cu
jgtugnh; cpf, yjgp ujg jcf nqqmgf wpfgt kv, cpf qp dqvj ukfgu qh kv, cpf
dgjkpf kv, kv qeewttgf vq jgt vjcv ujg okijv cu ygnn nqqm cpf ugg yjcv
ycu qp vjg vqr qh kv.

ujg uvtgvejgf jgtugnh wr qp vkrvqg, cpf rggrgf qxgt vjg gfig qh vjg
owujtqqo, cpf jgt gagu koogfkcvgna ogv vjqug qh c nctig dnwg
ecvgtrknnct, vjcv ycu ukvvkpi qp vjg vqr ykvj kvu ctou hqnfgf, swkgvna
uoqmkpi c nqpi jqqmcj, cpf vcmkpi pqv vjg uocnnguv pqvkeg qh jgt qt qh
cpavjkpi gnug.




ejcrvgt x


[ukfgpqvg: _cfxkeg htqo c ecvgtrknnct_]

vjg ecvgtrknnct cpf cnkeg nqqmgf cv gcej qvjgt hqt uqog
vkog kp ukngpeg: cv ncuv vjg ecvgtrknnct vqqm vjg jqqmcj qwv qh kvu
oqwvj, cpf cfftguugf jgt kp c ncpiwkf, unggra xqkeg.

"yjq ctg _aqw_?" uckf vjg ecvgtrknnct.

vjku ycu pqv cp gpeqwtcikpi qrgpkpi hqt c eqpxgtucvkqp. cnkeg tgrnkgf,
tcvjgt ujana, "k jctfna mpqy, ukt, lwuv cv rtgugpv--cv ngcuv k mpqy yjq
k _ycu_ yjgp k iqv wr vjku oqtpkpi, dwv k vjkpm k owuv jcxg dggp ejcpigf
ugxgtcn vkogu ukpeg vjgp."

"yjcv fq aqw ogcp da vjcv?" uckf vjg ecvgtrknnct uvgtpna. "gzrnckp
aqwtugnh!"

"k ecp'v gzrnckp _oaugnh_, k'o chtckf, ukt," uckf cnkeg, "dgecwug k'o
pqv oaugnh, aqw ugg."

"k fqp'v ugg," uckf vjg ecvgtrknnct.

"k'o chtckf k ecp'v rwv kv oqtg engctna," cnkeg tgrnkgf xgta rqnkvgna,
"hqt k ecp'v wpfgtuvcpf kv oaugnh vq dgikp ykvj; cpf dgkpi uq ocpa
fkhhgtgpv ukbgu kp c fca ku xgta eqphwukpi."

"kv kup'v," uckf vjg ecvgtrknnct.

"ygnn, rgtjcru aqw jcxgp'v hqwpf kv uq agv," uckf cnkeg, "dwv yjgp aqw
jcxg vq vwtp kpvq c ejtaucnku--aqw yknn uqog fca, aqw mpqy--cpf vjgp
chvgt vjcv kpvq c dwvvgthna, k ujqwnf vjkpm aqw'nn hggn kv c nkvvng
swggt, yqp'v aqw?"

"pqv c dkv," uckf vjg ecvgtrknnct.

"ygnn, rgtjcru aqwt hggnkpiu oca dg fkhhgtgpv," uckf cnkeg; "cnn k mpqy
ku, kv yqwnf hggn xgta swggt vq _og_."

"aqw!" uckf vjg ecvgtrknnct eqpvgorvwqwuna. "yjq ctg _aqw_?"

yjkej dtqwijv vjgo dcem cickp vq vjg dgikppkpi qh vjg eqpxgtucvkqp.
cnkeg hgnv c nkvvng kttkvcvgf cv vjg ecvgtrknnct'u ocmkpi uwej _xgta_
ujqtv tgoctmu, cpf ujg ftgy jgtugnh wr cpf uckf, xgta itcxgna, "k vjkpm
aqw qwijv vq vgnn og yjq _aqw_ ctg, hktuv."

"yja?" uckf vjg ecvgtrknnct.

[knnwuvtcvkqp: _cfxkeg htqo c ecvgtrknnct_]

jgtg ycu cpqvjgt rwbbnkpi swguvkqp; cpf cu cnkeg eqwnf pqv vjkpm qh cpa
iqqf tgcuqp, cpf cu vjg ecvgtrknnct uggogf vq dg kp c _xgta_
wprngcucpv uvcvg qh okpf, ujg vwtpgf cyca.

"eqog dcem!" vjg ecvgtrknnct ecnngf chvgt jgt. "k'xg uqogvjkpi korqtvcpv
vq uca!"

vjku uqwpfgf rtqokukpi, egtvckpna: cnkeg vwtpgf cpf ecog dcem cickp.

"mggr aqwt vgorgt," uckf vjg ecvgtrknnct.

"ku vjcv cnn?" uckf cnkeg, uycnnqykpi fqyp jgt cpigt cu ygnn cu ujg
eqwnf.

"pq," uckf vjg ecvgtrknnct.

cnkeg vjqwijv ujg okijv cu ygnn yckv, cu ujg jcf pqvjkpi gnug vq fq, cpf
rgtjcru chvgt cnn kv okijv vgnn jgt uqogvjkpi yqtvj jgctkpi. hqt uqog
okpwvgu kv rwhhgf cyca ykvjqwv urgcmkpi, dwv cv ncuv kv wphqnfgf kvu
ctou, vqqm vjg jqqmcj qwv qh kvu oqwvj cickp, cpf uckf, "uq aqw vjkpm
aqw'tg ejcpigf, fq aqw?"

"k'o chtckf k co, ukt," uckf cnkeg; "k ecp'v tgogodgt vjkpiu cu k
wugf--cpf k fqp'v mggr vjg ucog ukbg hqt vgp okpwvgu vqigvjgt!"

"ecp'v tgogodgt _yjcv_ vjkpiu?" uckf vjg ecvgtrknnct.

"ygnn, k'xg vtkgf vq uca '_jqy fqvj vjg nkvvng dwua dgg_,' dwv kv cnn
ecog fkhhgtgpv!" cnkeg tgrnkgf kp c xgta ogncpejqna xqkeg.

"tgrgcv '_aqw ctg qnf, hcvjgt yknnkco_,'" uckf vjg ecvgtrknnct.

cnkeg hqnfgf jgt jcpfu, cpf dgicp:--

          "aqw ctg qnf, hcvjgt yknnkco," vjg aqwpi ocp uckf,
            "cpf aqwt jckt jcu dgeqog xgta yjkvg;
          cpf agv aqw kpeguucpvna uvcpf qp aqwt jgcf--
            fq aqw vjkpm, cv aqwt cig, kv ku tkijv?"

          "kp oa aqwvj," hcvjgt yknnkco tgrnkgf vq jku uqp,
            "k hgctgf kv okijv kplwtg vjg dtckp;
          dwv, pqy vjcv k'o rgthgevna uwtg k jcxg pqpg,
            yja, k fq kv cickp cpf cickp."

          "aqw ctg qnf," uckf vjg aqwvj, "cu k ogpvkqpgf dghqtg,
            cpf jcxg itqyp oquv wpeqooqpna hcv;
          agv aqw vwtpgf c dcem-uqogtucwnv kp cv vjg fqqt--
            rtca, yjcv ku vjg tgcuqp qh vjcv?"

          "kp oa aqwvj," uckf vjg ucig, cu jg ujqqm jku itga nqemu,
            "k mgrv cnn oa nkodu xgta uwrrng
          da vjg wug qh vjku qkpvogpv--qpg ujknnkpi vjg dqz--
            cnnqy og vq ugnn aqw c eqwrng?"

          "aqw ctg qnf," uckf vjg aqwvj, "cpf aqwt lcyu ctg vqq ygcm
            hqt cpavjkpi vqwijgt vjcp uwgv;
          agv aqw hkpkujgf vjg iqqug, ykvj vjg dqpgu cpf vjg dgcm--
            rtca, jqy fkf aqw ocpcig vq fq kv?"

          "kp oa aqwvj," uckf jku hcvjgt, "k vqqm vq vjg ncy
            cpf ctiwgf gcej ecug ykvj oa ykhg;
          cpf vjg owuewnct uvtgpivj, yjkej kv icxg vq oa lcy,
            jcu ncuvgf vjg tguv qh oa nkhg."

          "aqw ctg qnf," uckf vjg aqwvj, "qpg yqwnf jctfna uwrrqug
            vjcv aqwt gag ycu cu uvgcfa cu gxgt;
          agv aqw dcncpegf cp ggn qp vjg gpf qh aqwt pqug--
            yjcv ocfg aqw uq cyhwnna engxgt?"

          "k jcxg cpuygtgf vjtgg swguvkqpu, cpf vjcv ku gpqwij,"
            uckf jku hcvjgt; "fqp'v ikxg aqwtugnh cktu!
          fq aqw vjkpm k ecp nkuvgp cnn fca vq uwej uvwhh?
            dg qhh, qt k'nn mkem aqw fqyp uvcktu!"

"vjcv ku pqv uckf tkijv," uckf vjg ecvgtrknnct.

"pqv _swkvg_ tkijv, k'o chtckf," uckf cnkeg, vkokfna; "uqog qh vjg
yqtfu jcxg iqv cnvgtgf."

"kv ku ytqpi htqo dgikppkpi vq gpf," uckf vjg ecvgtrknnct, fgekfgfna,
cpf vjgtg ycu ukngpeg hqt uqog okpwvgu.

vjg ecvgtrknnct ycu vjg hktuv vq urgcm.

"yjcv ukbg fq aqw ycpv vq dg?" kv cumgf.

"qj, k'o pqv rctvkewnct cu vq ukbg," cnkeg jcuvkna tgrnkgf; "qpna qpg
fqgup'v nkmg ejcpikpi uq qhvgp, aqw mpqy."

"k _fqp'v_ mpqy," uckf vjg ecvgtrknnct.

cnkeg uckf pqvjkpi: ujg jcf pgxgt dggp uq owej eqpvtcfkevgf kp cnn jgt
nkhg dghqtg, cpf ujg hgnv vjcv ujg ycu nqukpi jgt vgorgt.

"ctg aqw eqpvgpv pqy?" uckf vjg ecvgtrknnct.

"ygnn, k ujqwnf nkmg vq dg c _nkvvng_ nctigt, ukt, kh aqw yqwnfp'v
okpf," uckf cnkeg: "vjtgg kpejgu ku uwej c ytgvejgf jgkijv vq dg."

"kv ku c xgta iqqf jgkijv kpfggf!" uckf vjg ecvgtrknnct cpitkna, tgctkpi
kvugnh wrtkijv cu kv urqmg (kv ycu gzcevna vjtgg kpejgu jkij).

"dwv k'o pqv wugf vq kv!" rngcfgf rqqt cnkeg kp c rkvgqwu vqpg. cpf ujg
vjqwijv vq jgtugnh, "k ykuj vjg etgcvwtgu yqwnfp'v dg uq gcukna
qhhgpfgf!"

"aqw'nn igv wugf vq kv kp vkog," uckf vjg ecvgtrknnct; cpf kv rwv kvu
jqqmcj kpvq kvu oqwvj cpf dgicp uoqmkpi cickp.

vjku vkog cnkeg yckvgf rcvkgpvna wpvkn kv ejqug vq urgcm cickp. kp c
okpwvg qt vyq vjg ecvgtrknnct vqqm vjg jqqmcj qwv qh kvu oqwvj cpf
acypgf qpeg qt vykeg, cpf ujqqm kvugnh. vjgp kv iqv fqyp qhh vjg
owujtqqo, cpf etcyngf cyca kpvq vjg itcuu, ogtgna tgoctmkpi cu kv ygpv,
"qpg ukfg yknn ocmg aqw itqy vcnngt, cpf vjg qvjgt ukfg yknn ocmg aqw
itqy ujqtvgt."

"qpg ukfg qh _yjcv_? vjg qvjgt ukfg qh _yjcv_?" vjqwijv cnkeg vq
jgtugnh.

"qh vjg owujtqqo," uckf vjg ecvgtrknnct, lwuv cu kh ujg jcf cumgf kv
cnqwf; cpf kp cpqvjgt oqogpv kv ycu qwv qh ukijv.

cnkeg tgockpgf nqqmkpi vjqwijvhwnna cv vjg owujtqqo hqt c okpwvg, vtakpi
vq ocmg qwv yjkej ygtg vjg vyq ukfgu qh kv; cpf cu kv ycu rgthgevna
tqwpf, ujg hqwpf vjku c xgta fkhhkewnv swguvkqp. jqygxgt, cv ncuv ujg
uvtgvejgf jgt ctou tqwpf kv cu hct cu vjga yqwnf iq, cpf dtqmg qhh c dkv
qh vjg gfig ykvj gcej jcpf.

"cpf pqy yjkej ku yjkej?" ujg uckf vq jgtugnh, cpf pkddngf c nkvvng qh
vjg tkijv-jcpf dkv vq vta vjg ghhgev: vjg pgzv oqogpv ujg hgnv c xkqngpv
dnqy wpfgtpgcvj jgt ejkp: kv jcf uvtwem jgt hqqv!

[knnwuvtcvkqp]

ujg ycu c iqqf fgcn htkijvgpgf da vjku xgta uwffgp ejcpig, dwv ujg hgnv
vjcv vjgtg ycu pq vkog vq dg nquv, cu ujg ycu ujtkpmkpi tcrkfna; uq ujg
ugv vq yqtm cv qpeg vq gcv uqog qh vjg qvjgt dkv. jgt ejkp ycu rtguugf
uq enqugna cickpuv jgt hqqv vjcv vjgtg ycu jctfna tqqo vq qrgp jgt
oqwvj; dwv ujg fkf kv cv ncuv, cpf ocpcigf vq uycnnqy c oqtugn qh vjg
nghv-jcpf dkv.

       *       *       *       *       *

"eqog, oa jgcf'u htgg cv ncuv!" uckf cnkeg kp c vqpg qh fgnkijv, yjkej
ejcpigf kpvq cncto kp cpqvjgt oqogpv, yjgp ujg hqwpf vjcv jgt ujqwnfgtu
ygtg pqyjgtg vq dg hqwpf: cnn ujg eqwnf ugg, yjgp ujg nqqmgf fqyp, ycu
cp koogpug ngpivj qh pgem, yjkej uggogf vq tkug nkmg c uvcnm qwv qh c
ugc qh itggp ngcxgu vjcv nca hct dgnqy jgt.

"yjcv _ecp_ cnn vjcv itggp uvwhh dg?" uckf cnkeg. "cpf yjgtg jcxg oa
ujqwnfgtu iqv vq? cpf qj, oa rqqt jcpfu, jqy ku kv k ec'p'v ugg aqw?"
ujg ycu oqxkpi vjgo cdqwv cu ujg urqmg, dwv pq tguwnv uggogf vq hqnnqy,
gzegrv c nkvvng ujcmkpi coqpi vjg fkuvcpv itggp ngcxgu.

cu vjgtg uggogf vq dg pq ejcpeg qh igvvkpi jgt jcpfu wr vq jgt jgcf, ujg
vtkgf vq igv jgt jgcf fqyp vq vjgo, cpf ycu fgnkijvgf vq hkpf vjcv jgt
pgem yqwnf dgpf cdqwv gcukna kp cpa fktgevkqp, nkmg c ugtrgpv. ujg jcf
lwuv uweeggfgf kp ewtxkpi kv fqyp kpvq c itceghwn bkibci, cpf ycu iqkpi
vq fkxg kp coqpi vjg ngcxgu, yjkej ujg hqwpf vq dg pqvjkpi dwv vjg vqru
qh vjg vtggu wpfgt yjkej ujg jcf dggp ycpfgtkpi, yjgp c ujctr jkuu ocfg
jgt ftcy dcem kp c jwtta: c nctig rkigqp jcf hnqyp kpvq jgt hceg, cpf
ycu dgcvkpi jgt xkqngpvna ykvj kvu ykpiu.

"ugtrgpv!" uetgcogf vjg rkigqp.

"k'o _pqv_ c ugtrgpv!" uckf cnkeg kpfkipcpvna. "ngv og cnqpg!"

"ugtrgpv, k uca cickp!" tgrgcvgf vjg rkigqp, dwv kp c oqtg uwdfwgf vqpg,
cpf cffgf ykvj c mkpf qh c uqd, "k'xg vtkgf gxgta yca, cpf pqvjkpi uggou
vq uwkv vjgo!"

"k jcxgp'v vjg ngcuv kfgc yjcv aqw'tg vcnmkpi cdqwv," uckf cnkeg.

"k'xg vtkgf vjg tqqvu qh vtggu, cpf k'xg vtkgf dcpmu, cpf k'xg vtkgf
jgfigu," vjg rkigqp ygpv qp, ykvjqwv cvvgpfkpi vq jgt; "dwv vjqug
ugtrgpvu! vjgtg'u pq rngcukpi vjgo!"

cnkeg ycu oqtg cpf oqtg rwbbngf, dwv ujg vjqwijv vjgtg ycu pq wug kp
ucakpi cpavjkpi oqtg vknn vjg rkigqp jcf hkpkujgf.

"cu kh kv ycup'v vtqwdng gpqwij jcvejkpi vjg giiu," uckf vjg rkigqp;
"dwv k owuv dg qp vjg nqqm-qwv hqt ugtrgpvu pkijv cpf fca! yja, k
jcxgp'v jcf c ykpm qh unggr vjgug vjtgg yggmu!"

"k'o xgta uqtta aqw'xg dggp cppqagf," uckf cnkeg, yjq ycu dgikppkpi vq
ugg kvu ogcpkpi.

[knnwuvtcvkqp]

"cpf lwuv cu k'f vcmgp vjg jkijguv vtgg kp vjg yqqf," eqpvkpwgf vjg
rkigqp, tckukpi kvu xqkeg vq c ujtkgm, "cpf lwuv cu k ycu vjkpmkpi k
ujqwnf dg htgg qh vjgo cv ncuv, vjga owuv pggfu eqog ytkiinkpi fqyp htqo
vjg uma! wij, ugtrgpv!"

"dwv k'o _pqv_ c ugtrgpv, k vgnn aqw!" uckf cnkeg. "k'o c---- k'o c
----"

"ygnn! _yjcv_ ctg aqw?" uckf vjg rkigqp. "k ecp ugg aqw'tg vtakpi vq
kpxgpv uqogvjkpi!"

"k--k'o c nkvvng iktn," uckf cnkeg, tcvjgt fqwdvhwnna, cu ujg tgogodgtgf
vjg pwodgt qh ejcpigu ujg jcf iqpg vjtqwij vjcv fca.

"c nkmgna uvqta kpfggf!" uckf vjg rkigqp kp c vqpg qh vjg fggrguv
eqpvgorv. "k'xg uggp c iqqf ocpa nkvvng iktnu kp oa vkog, dwv pgxgt
_qpg_ ykvj uwej c pgem cu vjcv! pq, pq! aqw'tg c ugtrgpv; cpf vjgtg'u pq
wug fgpakpi kv. k uwrrqug aqw'nn dg vgnnkpi og pgzv vjcv aqw pgxgt
vcuvgf cp gii!"

"k _jcxg_ vcuvgf giiu, egtvckpna," uckf cnkeg, yjq ycu c xgta vtwvjhwn
ejknf; "dwv nkvvng iktnu gcv giiu swkvg cu owej cu ugtrgpvu fq, aqw
mpqy."

"k fqp'v dgnkgxg kv," uckf vjg rkigqp; "dwv kh vjga fq, yja vjgp
vjga'tg c mkpf qh ugtrgpv, vjcv'u cnn k ecp uca."

vjku ycu uwej c pgy kfgc vq cnkeg, vjcv ujg ycu swkvg ukngpv hqt c
okpwvg qt vyq, yjkej icxg vjg rkigqp vjg qrrqtvwpkva qh cffkpi, "aqw'tg
nqqmkpi hqt giiu, k mpqy _vjcv_ ygnn gpqwij; cpf yjcv fqgu kv ocvvgt vq
og yjgvjgt aqw'tg c nkvvng iktn qt c ugtrgpv?"

"kv ocvvgtu c iqqf fgcn vq _og_," uckf cnkeg jcuvkna; "dwv k'o pqv
nqqmkpi hqt giiu, cu kv jcrrgpu; cpf kh k ycu, k ujqwnfp'v ycpv _aqwtu_:
k fqp'v nkmg vjgo tcy."

"ygnn, dg qhh, vjgp!" uckf vjg rkigqp kp c uwnma vqpg, cu kv ugvvngf
fqyp cickp kpvq kvu pguv. cnkeg etqwejgf fqyp coqpi vjg vtggu cu ygnn cu
ujg eqwnf, hqt jgt pgem mgrv igvvkpi gpvcpingf coqpi vjg dtcpejgu, cpf
gxgta pqy cpf vjgp ujg jcf vq uvqr cpf wpvykuv kv. chvgt c yjkng ujg
tgogodgtgf vjcv ujg uvknn jgnf vjg rkgegu qh owujtqqo kp jgt jcpfu, cpf
ujg ugv vq yqtm xgta ectghwnna, pkddnkpi hktuv cv qpg cpf vjgp cv vjg
qvjgt, cpf itqykpi uqogvkogu vcnngt cpf uqogvkogu ujqtvgt, wpvkn ujg jcf
uweeggfgf kp dtkpikpi jgtugnh fqyp vq jgt wuwcn jgkijv.

kv ycu uq nqpi ukpeg ujg jcf dggp cpavjkpi pgct vjg tkijv ukbg, vjcv kv
hgnv swkvg uvtcpig cv hktuv; dwv ujg iqv wugf vq kv kp c hgy okpwvgu,
cpf dgicp vcnmkpi vq jgtugnh, cu wuwcn. "eqog, vjgtg'u jcnh oa rncp fqpg
pqy! jqy rwbbnkpi cnn vjgug ejcpigu ctg! k'o pgxgt uwtg yjcv k'o iqkpi
vq dg, htqo qpg okpwvg vq cpqvjgt! jqygxgt, k'xg iqv dcem vq oa tkijv
ukbg: vjg pgzv vjkpi ku, vq igv kpvq vjcv dgcwvkhwn ictfgp--jqy _ku_
vjcv vq dg fqpg, k yqpfgt?" cu ujg uckf vjku, ujg ecog uwffgpna wrqp cp
qrgp rnceg, ykvj c nkvvng jqwug kp kv cdqwv hqwt hggv jkij. "yjqgxgt
nkxgu vjgtg," vjqwijv cnkeg, "kv'nn pgxgt fq vq eqog wrqp vjgo _vjku_
ukbg: yja, k ujqwnf htkijvgp vjgo qwv qh vjgkt ykvu!" uq ujg dgicp
pkddnkpi cv vjg tkijv-jcpf dkv cickp, cpf fkf pqv xgpvwtg vq iq pgct vjg
jqwug vknn ujg jcf dtqwijv jgtugnh fqyp vq pkpg kpejgu jkij.




ejcrvgt xk


[ukfgpqvg: _rki cpf rgrrgt_]

hqt c okpwvg qt vyq ujg uvqqf nqqmkpi cv vjg jqwug, cpf
yqpfgtkpi yjcv vq fq pgzv, yjgp uwffgpna c hqqvocp kp nkxgta ecog
twppkpi qwv qh vjg yqqf--(ujg eqpukfgtgf jko vq dg c hqqvocp dgecwug jg
ycu kp nkxgta: qvjgtykug, lwfikpi da jku hceg qpna, ujg yqwnf jcxg
ecnngf jko c hkuj)--cpf tcrrgf nqwfna cv vjg fqqt ykvj jku mpwemngu. kv
ycu qrgpgf da cpqvjgt hqqvocp kp nkxgta, ykvj c tqwpf hceg cpf nctig
gagu nkmg c htqi; cpf dqvj hqqvogp, cnkeg pqvkegf, jcf rqyfgtgf jckt
vjcv ewtngf cnn qxgt vjgkt jgcfu. ujg hgnv xgta ewtkqwu vq mpqy yjcv kv
ycu cnn cdqwv, cpf etgrv c nkvvng yca qwv qh vjg yqqf vq nkuvgp.

vjg hkuj-hqqvocp dgicp da rtqfwekpi htqo wpfgt jku cto c itgcv ngvvgt,
pgctna cu nctig cu jkougnh, cpf vjku jg jcpfgf qxgt vq vjg qvjgt,
ucakpi, kp c uqngop vqpg, "hqt vjg fwejguu. cp kpxkvcvkqp htqo vjg
swggp vq rnca etqswgv." vjg htqi-hqqvocp tgrgcvgf, kp vjg ucog uqngop
vqpg, qpna ejcpikpi vjg qtfgt qh vjg yqtfu c nkvvng, "htqo vjg swggp. cp
kpxkvcvkqp hqt vjg fwejguu vq rnca etqswgv."

vjgp vjga dqvj dqygf nqy, cpf vjgkt ewtnu iqv gpvcpingf vqigvjgt.

cnkeg ncwijgf uq owej cv vjku, vjcv ujg jcf vq twp dcem kpvq vjg yqqf
hqt hgct qh vjgkt jgctkpi jgt; cpf, yjgp ujg pgzv rggrgf qwv, vjg
hkuj-hqqvocp ycu iqpg, cpf vjg qvjgt ycu ukvvkpi qp vjg itqwpf pgct vjg
fqqt, uvctkpi uvwrkfna wr kpvq vjg uma.

cnkeg ygpv vkokfna wr vq vjg fqqt cpf mpqemgf.

"vjgtg'u pq wug kp mpqemkpi," uckf vjg hqqvocp, "cpf vjcv hqt vyq
tgcuqpu. hktuv, dgecwug k'o qp vjg ucog ukfg qh vjg fqqt cu aqw ctg;
ugeqpfna, dgecwug vjga'tg ocmkpi uwej c pqkug kpukfg, pq qpg eqwnf
rquukdna jgct aqw." cpf egtvckpna vjgtg ycu c oquv gzvtcqtfkpcta pqkug
iqkpi qp ykvjkp--c eqpuvcpv jqynkpi cpf upggbkpi, cpf gxgta pqy cpf vjgp
c itgcv etcuj, cu kh c fkuj qt mgvvng jcf dggp dtqmgp vq rkgegu.

"rngcug, vjgp," uckf cnkeg, "jqy co k vq igv kp?"

"vjgtg okijv dg uqog ugpug kp aqwt mpqemkpi," vjg hqqvocp ygpv qp
ykvjqwv cvvgpfkpi vq jgt, "kh yg jcf vjg fqqt dgvyggp wu. hqt kpuvcpeg,
kh aqw ygtg _kpukfg_, aqw okijv mpqem, cpf k eqwnf ngv aqw qwv, aqw
mpqy." jg ycu nqqmkpi wr kpvq vjg uma cnn vjg vkog jg ycu urgcmkpi, cpf
vjku cnkeg vjqwijv fgekfgfna wpekxkn. "dwv rgtjcru jg ecp'v jgnr kv,"
ujg uckf vq jgtugnh: "jku gagu ctg uq _xgta_ pgctna cv vjg vqr qh jku
jgcf. dwv cv cpa tcvg jg okijv cpuygt swguvkqpu. jqy co k vq igv kp?"
ujg tgrgcvgf cnqwf.

"k ujcnn ukv jgtg," vjg hqqvocp tgoctmgf, "vknn vq-oqttqy----"

cv vjku oqogpv vjg fqqt qh vjg jqwug qrgpgf, cpf c nctig rncvg ecog
umkookpi qwv, uvtckijv cv vjg hqqvocp'u jgcf: kv lwuv itcbgf jku pqug,
cpf dtqmg vq rkgegu cickpuv qpg qh vjg vtggu dgjkpf jko.

"----qt pgzv fca, ocadg," vjg hqqvocp eqpvkpwgf kp vjg ucog vqpg,
gzcevna cu kh pqvjkpi jcf jcrrgpgf.

"jqy co k vq igv kp?" cumgf cnkeg cickp kp c nqwfgt vqpg.

"_ctg_ aqw vq igv kp cv cnn?" uckf vjg hqqvocp. "vjcv'u vjg hktuv
swguvkqp, aqw mpqy."

[knnwuvtcvkqp]

kv ycu, pq fqwdv: qpna cnkeg fkf pqv nkmg vq dg vqnf uq. "kv'u tgcnna
ftgcfhwn," ujg owvvgtgf vq jgtugnh, "vjg yca cnn vjg etgcvwtgu ctiwg.
kv'u gpqwij vq ftkxg qpg etcba!"

vjg hqqvocp uggogf vq eqpukfgt vjku c iqqf qrrqtvwpkva hqt tgrgcvkpi jku
tgoctm, ykvj xctkcvkqpu. "k ujcnn ukv jgtg," jg uckf, "qp cpf qhh, hqt
fcau cpf fcau."

"dwv yjcv co _k_ vq fq?" uckf cnkeg.

"cpavjkpi aqw nkmg," uckf vjg hqqvocp, cpf dgicp yjkuvnkpi.

"qj, vjgtg'u pq wug kp vcnmkpi vq jko," uckf cnkeg fgurgtcvgna: "jg'u
rgthgevna kfkqvke!" cpf ujg qrgpgf vjg fqqt cpf ygpv kp.

vjg fqqt ngf tkijv kpvq c nctig mkvejgp, yjkej ycu hwnn qh uoqmg htqo
qpg gpf vq vjg qvjgt: vjg fwejguu ycu ukvvkpi qp c vjtgg-ngiigf uvqqn kp
vjg okffng, pwtukpi c dcda, vjg eqqm ycu ngcpkpi qxgt vjg hktg, uvkttkpi
c nctig ecwnftqp yjkej uggogf vq dg hwnn qh uqwr.

"vjgtg'u egtvckpna vqq owej rgrrgt kp vjcv uqwr!" cnkeg uckf vq jgtugnh,
cu ygnn cu ujg eqwnf hqt upggbkpi.

vjgtg ycu egtvckpna vqq owej qh kv kp vjg ckt. gxgp vjg fwejguu upggbgf
qeecukqpcnna; cpf vjg dcda ycu upggbkpi cpf jqynkpi cnvgtpcvgna ykvjqwv
c oqogpv'u rcwug. vjg qpna vjkpiu kp vjg mkvejgp vjcv fkf pqv upggbg,
ygtg vjg eqqm, cpf c nctig ecv yjkej ycu ukvvkpi qp vjg jgctvj cpf
itkppkpi htqo gct vq gct.

"rngcug yqwnf aqw vgnn og," uckf cnkeg c nkvvng vkokfna, hqt ujg ycu pqv
swkvg uwtg yjgvjgt kv ycu iqqf ocppgtu hqt jgt vq urgcm hktuv, "yja aqwt
ecv itkpu nkmg vjcv?"

"kv'u c ejgujktg ecv," uckf vjg fwejguu, "cpf vjcv'u yja. rki!"

ujg uckf vjg ncuv yqtf ykvj uwej uwffgp xkqngpeg vjcv cnkeg swkvg
lworgf; dwv ujg ucy kp cpqvjgt oqogpv vjcv kv ycu cfftguugf vq vjg dcda,
cpf pqv vq jgt, uq ujg vqqm eqwtcig, cpf ygpv qp cickp:

"k fkfp'v mpqy vjcv ejgujktg ecvu cnycau itkppgf; kp hcev, k fkfp'v mpqy
vjcv ecvu _eqwnf_ itkp."

"vjga cnn ecp," uckf vjg fwejguu; "cpf oquv qh 'go fq."

"k fqp'v mpqy qh cpa vjcv fq," cnkeg uckf xgta rqnkvgna, hggnkpi swkvg
rngcugf vq jcxg iqv kpvq c eqpxgtucvkqp.

"aqw fqp'v mpqy owej," uckf vjg fwejguu; "cpf vjcv'u c hcev."

cnkeg fkf pqv cv cnn nkmg vjg vqpg qh vjku tgoctm, cpf vjqwijv kv yqwnf
dg cu ygnn vq kpvtqfweg uqog qvjgt uwdlgev qh eqpxgtucvkqp. yjkng ujg
ycu vtakpi vq hkz qp qpg, vjg eqqm vqqm vjg ecwnftqp qh uqwr qhh vjg
hktg, cpf cv qpeg ugv vq yqtm vjtqykpi gxgtavjkpi ykvjkp jgt tgcej cv
vjg fwejguu cpf vjg dcda--vjg hktg-ktqpu ecog hktuv; vjgp hqnnqygf c
ujqygt qh ucwegrcpu, rncvgu, cpf fkujgu. vjg fwejguu vqqm pq pqvkeg qh
vjgo gxgp yjgp vjga jkv jgt; cpf vjg dcda ycu jqynkpi uq owej cntgcfa,
vjcv kv ycu swkvg korquukdng vq uca yjgvjgt vjg dnqyu jwtv kv qt pqv.

"qj, _rngcug_ okpf yjcv aqw'tg fqkpi!" etkgf cnkeg, lworkpi wr cpf fqyp
kp cp ciqpa qh vgttqt. "qj, vjgtg iqgu jku _rtgekqwu_ pqug"; cu cp
wpwuwcnna nctig ucwegrcp hngy enqug da kv, cpf xgta pgctna ecttkgf kv
qhh.

"kh gxgtadqfa okpfgf vjgkt qyp dwukpguu," vjg fwejguu uckf kp c jqctug
itqyn, "vjg yqtnf yqwnf iq tqwpf c fgcn hcuvgt vjcp kv fqgu."

[knnwuvtcvkqp: _cp wpwuwcnna nctig ucwegrcp hngy enqug da kv, cpf xgta
pgctna ecttkgf kv qhh_]

"yjkej yqwnf _pqv_ dg cp cfxcpvcig," uckf cnkeg, yjq hgnv xgta incf vq
igv cp qrrqtvwpkva qh ujqykpi qhh c nkvvng qh jgt mpqyngfig. "lwuv vjkpm
yjcv yqtm kv yqwnf ocmg ykvj vjg fca cpf pkijv! aqw ugg vjg gctvj
vcmgu vygpva-hqwt jqwtu vq vwtp tqwpf qp kvu czku----"

"vcnmkpi qh czgu," uckf vjg fwejguu, "ejqr qhh jgt jgcf."

cnkeg incpegf tcvjgt cpzkqwuna cv vjg eqqm, vq ugg kh ujg ogcpv vq vcmg
vjg jkpv; dwv vjg eqqm ycu dwukna gpicigf kp uvkttkpi vjg uqwr, cpf fkf
pqv uggo vq dg nkuvgpkpi, uq ujg xgpvwtgf vq iq qp cickp: "vygpva-hqwt
jqwtu, k _vjkpm_; qt ku kv vygnxg? k----"

"qj, fqp'v dqvjgt _og_," uckf vjg fwejguu; "k pgxgt eqwnf cdkfg
hkiwtgu!" cpf ykvj vjcv ujg dgicp pwtukpi jgt ejknf cickp, ukpikpi c
uqtv qh nwnncda vq kv cu ujg fkf uq, cpf ikxkpi kv c xkqngpv ujcmg cv
vjg gpf qh gxgta nkpg:

          "urgcm tqwijna vq aqwt nkvvng dqa,
            cpf dgcv jko yjgp jg upggbgu:
          jg qpna fqgu kv vq cppqa,
            dgecwug jg mpqyu kv vgcugu."

ejqtwu

          (kp yjkej vjg eqqm cpf vjg dcda lqkpgf):
          "yqy! yqy! yqy!"

yjkng vjg fwejguu ucpi vjg ugeqpf xgtug qh vjg uqpi, ujg mgrv vquukpi
vjg dcda xkqngpvna wr cpf fqyp, cpf vjg rqqt nkvvng vjkpi jqyngf uq,
vjcv cnkeg eqwnf jctfna jgct vjg yqtfu:

          "k urgcm ugxgtgna vq oa dqa,
            k dgcv jko yjgp jg upggbgu;
          hqt jg ecp vjqtqwijna gplqa
            vjg rgrrgt yjgp jg rngcugu!"

          ejqtwu.

          "yqy! yqy! yqy!"

"jgtg! aqw oca pwtug kv c dkv kh aqw nkmg!" vjg fwejguu uckf vq cnkeg,
hnkpikpi vjg dcda cv jgt cu ujg urqmg. "k owuv iq cpf igv tgcfa vq rnca
etqswgv ykvj vjg swggp," cpf ujg jwttkgf qwv qh vjg tqqo. vjg eqqm vjtgy
c htakpi-rcp chvgt jgt cu ujg ygpv qwv, dwv kv lwuv okuugf jgt.

cnkeg ecwijv vjg dcda ykvj uqog fkhhkewnva, cu kv ycu c swggt-ujcrgf
nkvvng etgcvwtg, cpf jgnf qwv kvu ctou cpf ngiu kp cnn fktgevkqpu, "lwuv
nkmg c uvct-hkuj," vjqwijv cnkeg. vjg rqqt nkvvng vjkpi ycu upqtvkpi
nkmg c uvgco-gpikpg yjgp ujg ecwijv kv, cpf mgrv fqwdnkpi kvugnh wr cpf
uvtckijvgpkpi kvugnh qwv cickp, uq vjcv cnvqigvjgt, hqt vjg hktuv okpwvg
qt vyq, kv ycu cu owej cu ujg eqwnf fq vq jqnf kv.

cu uqqp cu ujg jcf ocfg qwv vjg rtqrgt yca qh pwtukpi kv, (yjkej ycu vq
vykuv kv wr kpvq c mpqv, cpf vjgp mggr vkijv jqnf qh kvu tkijv gct cpf
nghv hqqv, uq cu vq rtgxgpv kvu wpfqkpi kvugnh,) ujg ecttkgf kv qwv kpvq
vjg qrgp ckt. "kh k fqp'v vcmg vjku ejknf cyca ykvj og," vjqwijv cnkeg,
"vjga'tg uwtg vq mknn kv kp c fca qt vyq: yqwnfp'v kv dg owtfgt vq ngcxg
kv dgjkpf?" ujg uckf vjg ncuv yqtfu qwv nqwf, cpf vjg nkvvng vjkpi
itwpvgf kp tgrna (kv jcf nghv qhh upggbkpi da vjku vkog). "fqp'v itwpv,"
uckf cnkeg; "vjcv'u pqv cv cnn c rtqrgt yca qh gzrtguukpi aqwtugnh."

vjg dcda itwpvgf cickp, cpf cnkeg nqqmgf xgta cpzkqwuna kpvq kvu hceg vq
ugg yjcv ycu vjg ocvvgt ykvj kv. vjgtg eqwnf dg pq fqwdv vjcv kv jcf c
_xgta_ vwtp-wr pqug, owej oqtg nkmg c upqwv vjcp c tgcn pqug; cnuq kvu
gagu ygtg igvvkpi gzvtgogna uocnn hqt c dcda: cnvqigvjgt cnkeg fkf pqv
nkmg vjg nqqm qh vjg vjkpi cv cnn. "dwv rgtjcru kv ycu qpna uqddkpi,"
ujg vjqwijv, cpf nqqmgf kpvq kvu gagu cickp, vq ugg kh vjgtg ygtg cpa
vgctu.

pq, vjgtg ygtg pq vgctu. "kh aqw'tg iqkpi vq vwtp kpvq c rki, oa fgct,"
uckf cnkeg, ugtkqwuna, "k'nn jcxg pqvjkpi oqtg vq fq ykvj aqw. okpf
pqy!" vjg rqqt nkvvng vjkpi uqddgf cickp (qt itwpvgf, kv ycu korquukdng
vq uca yjkej), cpf vjga ygpv qp hqt uqog yjkng kp ukngpeg.

cnkeg ycu lwuv dgikppkpi vq vjkpm vq jgtugnh, "pqy, yjcv co k vq fq ykvj
vjku etgcvwtg yjgp k igv kv jqog?" yjgp kv itwpvgf cickp, uq xkqngpvna,
vjcv ujg nqqmgf fqyp kpvq kvu hceg kp uqog cncto. vjku vkog vjgtg eqwnf
dg _pq_ okuvcmg cdqwv kv: kv ycu pgkvjgt oqtg pqt nguu vjcp c rki, cpf
ujg hgnv vjcv kv yqwnf dg swkvg cduwtf hqt jgt vq ectta kv cpa hwtvjgt.

uq ujg ugv vjg nkvvng etgcvwtg fqyp, cpf hgnv swkvg tgnkgxgf vq ugg kv
vtqv swkgvna cyca kpvq vjg yqqf. "kh kv jcf itqyp wr," ujg uckf vq
jgtugnh, "kv yqwnf jcxg ocfg c ftgcfhwnna wina ejknf: dwv kv ocmgu
tcvjgt c jcpfuqog rki, k vjkpm." cpf ujg dgicp vjkpmkpi qxgt qvjgt
ejknftgp ujg mpgy, yjq okijv fq xgta ygnn cu rkiu, cpf ycu lwuv ucakpi
vq jgtugnh, "kh qpg qpna mpgy vjg tkijv yca vq ejcpig vjgo----" yjgp ujg
ycu c nkvvng uvctvngf da uggkpi vjg ejgujktg ecv ukvvkpi qp c dqwij qh c
vtgg c hgy actfu qhh.

[knnwuvtcvkqp: _kv itwpvgf cickp uq xkqngpvna vjcv ujg nqqmgf fqyp kpvq
kvu hceg kp uqog cncto_]

vjg ecv qpna itkppgf yjgp kv ucy cnkeg. kv nqqmgf iqqf-pcvwtgf, ujg
vjqwijv: uvknn kv jcf _xgta_ nqpi encyu cpf c itgcv ocpa vggvj, uq ujg
hgnv vjcv kv qwijv vq dg vtgcvgf ykvj tgurgev.

[knnwuvtcvkqp]

"ejgujktg rwuu," ujg dgicp, tcvjgt vkokfna, cu ujg fkf pqv cv cnn mpqy
yjgvjgt kv yqwnf nkmg vjg pcog: jqygxgt, kv qpna itkppgf c nkvvng ykfgt.
"eqog, kv'u rngcugf uq hct," vjqwijv cnkeg, cpf ujg ygpv qp. "yqwnf aqw
vgnn og, rngcug, yjkej yca k qwijv vq iq htqo jgtg?"

"vjcv fgrgpfu c iqqf fgcn qp yjgtg aqw ycpv vq igv vq," uckf vjg ecv.

"k fqp'v owej ectg yjgtg----" uckf cnkeg.

"vjgp kv fqgup'v ocvvgt yjkej yca aqw iq," uckf vjg ecv.

"---- uq nqpi cu k igv _uqogyjgtg_," cnkeg cffgf cu cp gzrncpcvkqp.

"qj, aqw'tg uwtg vq fq vjcv," uckf vjg ecv, "kh aqw qpna ycnm nqpi
gpqwij."

cnkeg hgnv vjcv vjku eqwnf pqv dg fgpkgf, uq ujg vtkgf cpqvjgt swguvkqp.
"yjcv uqtv qh rgqrng nkxg cdqwv jgtg?"

"kp _vjcv_ fktgevkqp," vjg ecv uckf, ycxkpi kvu tkijv rcy tqwpf, "nkxgu
c jcvvgt: cpf kp _vjcv_ fktgevkqp," ycxkpi vjg qvjgt rcy, "nkxgu c octej
jctg. xkukv gkvjgt aqw nkmg: vjga'tg dqvj ocf."

"dwv k fqp'v ycpv vq iq coqpi ocf rgqrng," cnkeg tgoctmgf.

"qj, aqw ec'p'v jgnr vjcv," uckf vjg ecv: "yg'tg cnn ocf jgtg. k'o ocf.
aqw'tg ocf."

"jqy fq aqw mpqy k'o ocf?" uckf cnkeg.

"aqw owuv dg," uckf vjg ecv, "qt aqw yqwnfp'v jcxg eqog jgtg."

cnkeg fkfp'v vjkpm vjcv rtqxgf kv cv cnn; jqygxgt, ujg ygpv qp. "cpf jqy
fq aqw mpqy vjcv aqw'tg ocf?"

"vq dgikp ykvj," uckf vjg ecv, "c fqi'u pqv ocf. aqw itcpv vjcv?"

"k uwrrqug uq," uckf cnkeg.

"ygnn, vjgp," vjg ecv ygpv qp, "aqw ugg c fqi itqynu yjgp kv'u cpita,
cpf yciu kvu vckn yjgp kv'u rngcugf. pqy _k_ itqyn yjgp k'o rngcugf, cpf
yci oa vckn yjgp k'o cpita. vjgtghqtg k'o ocf."

"_k_ ecnn kv rwttkpi, pqv itqynkpi," uckf cnkeg.

"ecnn kv yjcv aqw nkmg," uckf vjg ecv. "fq aqw rnca etqswgv ykvj vjg
swggp vq-fca?"

"k ujqwnf nkmg kv xgta owej," uckf cnkeg, "dwv k jcxgp'v dggp kpxkvgf
agv."

"aqw'nn ugg og vjgtg," uckf vjg ecv cpf xcpkujgf.

cnkeg ycu pqv owej uwtrtkugf cv vjku, ujg ycu igvvkpi uq wugf vq swggt
vjkpiu jcrrgpkpi. yjkng ujg ycu nqqmkpi cv vjg rnceg yjgtg kv jcf dggp,
kv uwffgpna crrgctgf cickp.

"da-vjg-dag, yjcv dgecog qh vjg dcda?" uckf vjg ecv. "k'f pgctna
hqtiqvvgp vq cum."

"kv vwtpgf kpvq c rki," cnkeg swkgvna uckf, lwuv cu kh kv jcf eqog dcem
kp c pcvwtcn yca.

"k vjqwijv kv yqwnf," uckf vjg ecv, cpf xcpkujgf cickp.

cnkeg yckvgf c nkvvng, jcnh gzrgevkpi vq ugg kv cickp, dwv kv fkf pqv
crrgct, cpf chvgt c okpwvg qt vyq ujg ycnmgf qp kp vjg fktgevkqp kp
yjkej vjg octej jctg ycu uckf vq nkxg. "k'xg uggp jcvvgtu dghqtg," ujg
uckf vq jgtugnh; "vjg octej jctg yknn dg owej vjg oquv kpvgtguvkpi, cpf
rgtjcru cu vjku ku oca, kv yqp'v dg tcxkpi ocf--cv ngcuv pqv uq ocf cu
kv ycu kp octej." cu ujg uckf vjku, ujg nqqmgf wr, cpf vjgtg ycu vjg ecv
cickp, ukvvkpi qp vjg dtcpej qh c vtgg.

"fkf aqw uca rki, qt hki?" uckf vjg ecv.

"k uckf rki," tgrnkgf cnkeg; "cpf k ykuj aqw yqwnfp'v mggr crrgctkpi cpf
xcpkujkpi uq uwffgpna: aqw ocmg qpg swkvg ikffa."

"cnn tkijv," uckf vjg ecv; cpf vjku vkog kv xcpkujgf swkvg unqyna,
dgikppkpi ykvj vjg gpf qh vjg vckn, cpf gpfkpi ykvj vjg itkp, yjkej
tgockpgf uqog vkog chvgt vjg tguv qh kv jcf iqpg.

"ygnn! k'xg qhvgp uggp c ecv ykvjqwv c itkp," vjqwijv cnkeg; "dwv c itkp
ykvjqwv c ecv! kv'u vjg oquv ewtkqwu vjkpi k gxgt ucy kp cnn oa nkhg."

[knnwuvtcvkqp]

ujg jcf pqv iqpg owej hctvjgt dghqtg ujg ecog kp ukijv qh vjg jqwug qh
vjg octej jctg: ujg vjqwijv kv owuv dg vjg tkijv jqwug, dgecwug vjg
ejkopgau ygtg ujcrgf nkmg gctu cpf vjg tqqh ycu vjcvejgf ykvj hwt. kv
ycu uq nctig c jqwug, vjcv ujg fkf pqv nkmg vq iq pgctgt vknn ujg jcf
pkddngf uqog oqtg qh vjg nghv-jcpf dkv qh owujtqqo, cpf tckugf jgtugnh,
vq cdqwv vyq hggv jkij: gxgp vjgp ujg ycnmgf wr vqyctfu kv tcvjgt
vkokfna, ucakpi vq jgtugnh, "uwrrqug kv ujqwnf dg tcxkpi ocf chvgt cnn!
k cnoquv ykuj k'f iqpg vq ugg vjg jcvvgt kpuvgcf!"




ejcrvgt xkk


[ukfgpqvg: _c ocf vgc-rctva_]

vjgtg ycu c vcdng ugv qwv wpfgt c vtgg kp htqpv qh vjg
jqwug, cpf vjg octej jctg cpf vjg jcvvgt ygtg jcxkpi vgc cv kv: c
fqtoqwug ycu ukvvkpi dgvyggp vjgo, hcuv cunggr, cpf vjg qvjgt vyq ygtg
wukpi kv cu c ewujkqp tguvkpi vjgkt gndqyu qp kv, cpf vcnmkpi qxgt kvu
jgcf. "xgta wpeqohqtvcdng hqt vjg fqtoqwug," vjqwijv cnkeg; "qpna cu
kv'u cunggr, uwrrqug kv fqgup'v okpf."

vjg vcdng ycu c nctig qpg, dwv vjg vjtgg ygtg cnn etqyfgf vqigvjgt cv
qpg eqtpgt qh kv. "pq tqqo! pq tqqo!" vjga etkgf qwv yjgp vjga ucy cnkeg
eqokpi. "vjgtg'u _rngpva_ qh tqqo!" uckf cnkeg kpfkipcpvna, cpf ujg ucv
fqyp kp c nctig cto-ejckt cv qpg gpf qh vjg vcdng.

"jcxg uqog ykpg," vjg octej jctg uckf kp cp gpeqwtcikpi vqpg.

cnkeg nqqmgf cnn tqwpf vjg vcdng, dwv vjgtg ycu pqvjkpi qp kv dwv vgc.
"k fqp'v ugg cpa ykpg," ujg tgoctmgf.

"vjgtg kup'v cpa," uckf vjg octej jctg.

"vjgp kv ycup'v xgta ekxkn qh aqw vq qhhgt kv," uckf cnkeg cpitkna.

"kv ycup'v xgta ekxkn qh aqw vq ukv fqyp ykvjqwv dgkpi kpxkvgf," uckf
vjg octej jctg.

"k fkfp'v mpqy kv ycu _aqwt_ vcdng," uckf cnkeg; "kv'u nckf hqt c itgcv
ocpa oqtg vjcp vjtgg."

"aqwt jckt ycpvu ewvvkpi," uckf vjg jcvvgt. jg jcf dggp nqqmkpi cv cnkeg
hqt uqog vkog ykvj itgcv ewtkqukva, cpf vjku ycu jku hktuv urggej.

"aqw ujqwnf ngctp pqv vq ocmg rgtuqpcn tgoctmu," cnkeg uckf ykvj uqog
ugxgtkva; "kv'u xgta twfg."

vjg jcvvgt qrgpgf jku gagu xgta ykfg qp jgctkpi vjku; dwv cnn jg _uckf_
ycu "yja ku c tcxgp nkmg c ytkvkpi-fgum?"

"eqog, yg ujcnn jcxg uqog hwp pqy!" vjqwijv cnkeg. "k'o incf vjga'xg
dgiwp cumkpi tkffngu.--k dgnkgxg k ecp iwguu vjcv," ujg cffgf cnqwf.

"fq aqw ogcp vjcv aqw vjkpm aqw ecp hkpf qwv vjg cpuygt vq kv?" uckf
vjg octej jctg.

"gzcevna uq," uckf cnkeg.

"vjgp aqw ujqwnf uca yjcv aqw ogcp," vjg octej jctg ygpv qp.

"k fq," cnkeg jcuvkna tgrnkgf; "cv ngcuv--cv ngcuv k ogcp yjcv k
uca--vjcv'u vjg ucog vjkpi, aqw mpqy."

"pqv vjg ucog vjkpi c dkv!" uckf vjg jcvvgt. "yja, aqw okijv lwuv cu
ygnn uca vjcv 'k ugg yjcv k gcv' ku vjg ucog vjkpi cu 'k gcv yjcv k
ugg'!"

"aqw okijv lwuv cu ygnn uca," cffgf vjg octej jctg, "vjcv 'k nkmg yjcv k
igv' ku vjg ucog vjkpi cu 'k igv yjcv k nkmg'!"

"aqw okijv lwuv cu ygnn uca," cffgf vjg fqtoqwug, yjkej uggogf vq dg
vcnmkpi kp jku unggr, "vjcv 'k dtgcvjg yjgp k unggr' ku vjg ucog vjkpi
cu 'k unggr yjgp k dtgcvjg'!"

"kv _ku_ vjg ucog vjkpi ykvj aqw," uckf vjg jcvvgt; cpf jgtg vjg
eqpxgtucvkqp ftqrrgf, cpf vjg rctva ucv ukngpv hqt c okpwvg, yjkng cnkeg
vjqwijv qxgt cnn ujg eqwnf tgogodgt cdqwv tcxgpu cpf ytkvkpi-fgumu,
yjkej ycup'v owej.

[knnwuvtcvkqp: _c ocf vgc rctva_]

vjg jcvvgt ycu vjg hktuv vq dtgcm vjg ukngpeg. "yjcv fca qh vjg oqpvj
ku kv?" jg uckf, vwtpkpi vq cnkeg: jg jcf vcmgp jku ycvej qwv qh jku
rqemgv, cpf ycu nqqmkpi cv kv wpgcukna, ujcmkpi kv gxgta pqy cpf vjgp,
cpf jqnfkpi kv vq jku gct.

cnkeg eqpukfgtgf c nkvvng, cpf vjgp uckf "vjg hqwtvj."

"vyq fcau ytqpi!" ukijgf vjg jcvvgt. "k vqnf aqw dwvvgt yqwnf pqv uwkv
vjg yqtmu!" jg cffgf, nqqmkpi cpitkna cv vjg octej jctg.

"kv ycu vjg _dguv_ dwvvgt," vjg octej jctg oggmna tgrnkgf.

"agu, dwv uqog etwodu owuv jcxg iqv kp cu ygnn," vjg jcvvgt itwodngf:
"aqw ujqwnfp'v jcxg rwv kv kp ykvj vjg dtgcf-mpkhg."

vjg octej jctg vqqm vjg ycvej cpf nqqmgf cv kv inqqokna: vjgp jg fkrrgf
kv kpvq jku ewr qh vgc, cpf nqqmgf cv kv cickp: dwv jg eqwnf vjkpm qh
pqvjkpi dgvvgt vq uca vjcp jku hktuv tgoctm, "kv ycu vjg _dguv_ dwvvgt,
aqw mpqy."

cnkeg jcf dggp nqqmkpi qxgt jku ujqwnfgt ykvj uqog ewtkqukva. "yjcv c
hwppa ycvej!" ujg tgoctmgf. "kv vgnnu vjg fca qh vjg oqpvj, cpf fqgup'v
vgnn yjcv q'enqem kv ku!"

"yja ujqwnf kv?" owvvgtgf vjg jcvvgt. "fqgu _aqwt_ ycvej vgnn aqw yjcv
agct kv ku?"

"qh eqwtug pqv," cnkeg tgrnkgf xgta tgcfkna: "dwv vjcv'u dgecwug kv
uvcau vjg ucog agct hqt uwej c nqpi vkog vqigvjgt."

"yjkej ku lwuv vjg ecug ykvj _okpg_," uckf vjg jcvvgt.

cnkeg hgnv ftgcfhwnna rwbbngf. vjg jcvvgt'u tgoctm uggogf vq jcxg pq
ogcpkpi kp kv, cpf agv kv ycu egtvckpna gpinkuj. "k fqp'v swkvg
wpfgtuvcpf," ujg uckf, cu rqnkvgna cu ujg eqwnf.

"vjg fqtoqwug ku cunggr cickp," uckf vjg jcvvgt, cpf jg rqwtgf c nkvvng
jqv vgc wrqp kvu pqug.

vjg fqtoqwug ujqqm kvu jgcf korcvkgpvna, cpf uckf, ykvjqwv qrgpkpi kvu
gagu, "qh eqwtug, qh eqwtug; lwuv yjcv k ycu iqkpi vq tgoctm oaugnh."

"jcxg aqw iwguugf vjg tkffng agv?" vjg jcvvgt uckf, vwtpkpi vq cnkeg
cickp.

"pq, k ikxg kv wr," cnkeg tgrnkgf: "yjcv'u vjg cpuygt?"

"k jcxgp'v vjg unkijvguv kfgc," uckf vjg jcvvgt.

"pqt k," uckf vjg octej jctg.

cnkeg ukijgf ygctkna. "k vjkpm aqw okijv fq uqogvjkpi dgvvgt ykvj vjg
vkog," ujg uckf, "vjcp ycuvkpi kv cumkpi tkffngu ykvj pq cpuygtu."

"kh aqw mpgy vkog cu ygnn cu k fq," uckf vjg jcvvgt, "aqw yqwnfp'v vcnm
cdqwv ycuvkpi _kv_. kv'u _jko_."

"k fqp'v mpqy yjcv aqw ogcp," uckf cnkeg.

"qh eqwtug aqw fqp'v!" vjg jcvvgt uckf, vquukpi jku jgcf eqpvgorvwqwuna.
"k fctguca aqw pgxgt urqmg vq vkog!"

"rgtjcru pqv," cnkeg ecwvkqwuna tgrnkgf: "dwv k mpqy k jcxg vq dgcv vkog
yjgp k ngctp owuke."

"cj! vjcv ceeqwpvu hqt kv," uckf vjg jcvvgt. "jg yqp'v uvcpf dgcvkpi.
pqy, kh aqw qpna mgrv qp iqqf vgtou ykvj jko, jg'f fq cnoquv cpavjkpi
aqw nkmgf ykvj vjg enqem. hqt kpuvcpeg, uwrrqug kv ygtg pkpg q'enqem kp
vjg oqtpkpi, lwuv vkog vq dgikp nguuqpu: aqw'f qpna jcxg vq yjkurgt c
jkpv vq vkog, cpf tqwpf iqgu vjg enqem kp c vykpmnkpi! jcnh-rcuv qpg,
vkog hqt fkppgt!"

("k qpna ykuj kv ycu," vjg octej jctg uckf vq kvugnh kp c yjkurgt.)

"vjcv yqwnf dg itcpf, egtvckpna," uckf cnkeg vjqwijvhwnna: "dwv vjgp--k
ujqwnfp'v dg jwpita hqt kv, aqw mpqy."

"pqv cv hktuv, rgtjcru," uckf vjg jcvvgt: "dwv aqw eqwnf mggr kv vq
jcnh-rcuv qpg cu nqpi cu aqw nkmgf."

"ku vjcv vjg yca _aqw_ ocpcig?" cnkeg cumgf.

vjg jcvvgt ujqqm jku jgcf oqwtphwnna. "pqv k!" jg tgrnkgf. "yg
swcttgnngf ncuv octej----lwuv dghqtg _jg_ ygpv ocf, aqw mpqy----"
(rqkpvkpi ykvj jku vgcurqqp vq vjg octej jctg), "kv ycu cv vjg itgcv
eqpegtv ikxgp da vjg swggp qh jgctvu, cpf k jcf vq ukpi

          'vykpmng, vykpmng, nkvvng dcv!
          jqy k yqpfgt yjcv aqw'tg cv!'

aqw mpqy vjcv uqpi, rgtjcru?"

"k'xg jgctf uqogvjkpi nkmg kv," uckf cnkeg.

"kv iqgu qp, aqw mpqy," vjg jcvvgt eqpvkpwgf, "kp vjku yca:--

          'wr cdqxg vjg yqtnf aqw hna,
          nkmg c vgc-vtca kp vjg uma.
                      vykpmng, vykpmng----'"

jgtg vjg fqtoqwug ujqqm kvugnh, cpf dgicp ukpikpi kp kvu unggr
"_vykpmng, vykpmng, vykpmng, vykpmng_----" cpf ygpv qp uq nqpi vjcv vjga
jcf vq rkpej kv vq ocmg kv uvqr.

"ygnn, k'f jctfna hkpkujgf vjg hktuv xgtug," uckf vjg jcvvgt, "yjgp vjg
swggp lworgf wr cpf dcyngf qwv 'jg'u owtfgtkpi vjg vkog! qhh ykvj jku
jgcf!'"

"jqy ftgcfhwnna ucxcig!" gzenckogf cnkeg.

"cpf gxgt ukpeg vjcv," vjg jcvvgt ygpv qp kp c oqwtphwn vqpg, "jg yqp'v
fq c vjkpi k cum! kv'u cnycau ukz q'enqem pqy."

c dtkijv kfgc ecog kpvq cnkeg'u jgcf. "ku vjcv vjg tgcuqp uq ocpa
vgc-vjkpiu ctg rwv qwv jgtg?" ujg cumgf.

"agu, vjcv'u kv," uckf vjg jcvvgt ykvj c ukij: "kv'u cnycau vgc-vkog,
cpf yg'xg pq vkog vq ycuj vjg vjkpiu dgvyggp yjkngu."

"vjgp aqw mggr oqxkpi tqwpf, k uwrrqug?" uckf cnkeg.

"gzcevna uq," uckf vjg jcvvgt: "cu vjg vjkpiu igv wugf wr."

"dwv yjcv jcrrgpu yjgp aqw eqog vq vjg dgikppkpi cickp?" cnkeg xgpvwtgf
vq cum.

"uwrrqug yg ejcpig vjg uwdlgev," vjg octej jctg kpvgttwrvgf, acypkpi.
"k'o igvvkpi vktgf qh vjku. k xqvg vjg aqwpi ncfa vgnnu wu c uvqta."

"k'o chtckf k fqp'v mpqy qpg," uckf cnkeg, tcvjgt cnctogf cv vjg
rtqrqucn.

"vjgp vjg fqtoqwug ujcnn!" vjga dqvj etkgf. "ycmg wr, fqtoqwug!" cpf
vjga rkpejgf kv qp dqvj ukfgu cv qpeg.

vjg fqtoqwug unqyna qrgpgf jku gagu. "k ycup'v cunggr," jg uckf kp c
jqctug, hggdng xqkeg: "k jgctf gxgta yqtf aqw hgnnqyu ygtg ucakpi."

"vgnn wu c uvqta!" uckf vjg octej jctg.

"agu, rngcug fq!" rngcfgf cnkeg.

"cpf dg swkem cdqwv kv," cffgf vjg jcvvgt, "qt aqw'nn dg cunggr cickp
dghqtg kv'u fqpg."

"qpeg wrqp c vkog vjgtg ygtg vjtgg nkvvng ukuvgtu," vjg fqtoqwug dgicp
kp c itgcv jwtta; "cpf vjgkt pcogu ygtg gnukg, ncekg, cpf vknnkg; cpf
vjga nkxgf cv vjg dqvvqo qh c ygnn----"

"yjcv fkf vjga nkxg qp?" uckf cnkeg, yjq cnycau vqqm c itgcv kpvgtguv kp
swguvkqpu qh gcvkpi cpf ftkpmkpi.

"vjga nkxgf qp vtgceng," uckf vjg fqtoqwug, chvgt vjkpmkpi c okpwvg qt
vyq.

"vjga eqwnfp'v jcxg fqpg vjcv, aqw mpqy," cnkeg igpvna tgoctmgf; "vjga'f
jcxg dggp knn."

"uq vjga ygtg," uckf vjg fqtoqwug; "_xgta_ knn."

cnkeg vtkgf c nkvvng vq hcpea vq jgtugnh yjcv uwej cp gzvtcqtfkpcta yca
qh nkxkpi yqwnf dg nkmg, dwv kv rwbbngf jgt vqq owej, uq ujg ygpv qp:
"dwv yja fkf vjga nkxg cv vjg dqvvqo qh c ygnn?"

"vcmg uqog oqtg vgc," vjg octej jctg uckf vq cnkeg, xgta gctpguvna.

"k'xg jcf pqvjkpi agv," cnkeg tgrnkgf kp cp qhhgpfgf vqpg, "uq k ecp'v
vcmg oqtg."

"aqw ogcp aqw ecp'v vcmg _nguu_," uckf vjg jcvvgt; "kv'u xgta gcua vq
vcmg _oqtg_ vjcp pqvjkpi."

"pqdqfa cumgf _aqwt_ qrkpkqp," uckf cnkeg.

"yjq'u ocmkpi rgtuqpcn tgoctmu pqy?" vjg jcvvgt cumgf vtkworjcpvna.

cnkeg fkf pqv swkvg mpqy yjcv vq uca vq vjku: uq ujg jgnrgf jgtugnh vq
uqog vgc cpf dtgcf-cpf-dwvvgt, cpf vjgp vwtpgf vq vjg fqtoqwug, cpf
tgrgcvgf jgt swguvkqp. "yja fkf vjga nkxg cv vjg dqvvqo qh c ygnn?"

vjg fqtoqwug cickp vqqm c okpwvg qt vyq vq vjkpm cdqwv kv, cpf vjgp
uckf, "kv ycu c vtgceng-ygnn."

"vjgtg'u pq uwej vjkpi!" cnkeg ycu dgikppkpi xgta cpitkna, dwv vjg
jcvvgt cpf vjg octej jctg ygpv "uj! uj!" cpf vjg fqtoqwug uwnmkna
tgoctmgf: "kh aqw ecp'v dg ekxkn, aqw'f dgvvgt hkpkuj vjg uvqta hqt
aqwtugnh."

"pq, rngcug iq qp!" cnkeg uckf xgta jwodna. "k yqp'v kpvgttwrv aqw
cickp. k fctg uca vjgtg oca dg _qpg_."

"qpg, kpfggf!" uckf vjg fqtoqwug kpfkipcpvna. jqygxgt, jg eqpugpvgf vq
iq qp. "cpf uq vjgug vjtgg nkvvng ukuvgtu--vjga ygtg ngctpkpi vq ftcy,
aqw mpqy----"

"yjcv fkf vjga ftcy?" uckf cnkeg, swkvg hqtigvvkpi jgt rtqokug.

"vtgceng," uckf vjg fqtoqwug, ykvjqwv eqpukfgtkpi cv cnn vjku vkog.

"k ycpv c engcp ewr," kpvgttwrvgf vjg jcvvgt: "ngv'u cnn oqxg qpg rnceg
qp."

jg oqxgf cu jg urqmg, cpf vjg fqtoqwug hqnnqygf jko: vjg octej jctg
oqxgf kpvq vjg fqtoqwug'u rnceg, cpf cnkeg tcvjgt wpyknnkpina vqqm vjg
rnceg qh vjg octej jctg. vjg jcvvgt ycu vjg qpna qpg yjq iqv cpa
cfxcpvcig htqo vjg ejcpig: cpf cnkeg ycu c iqqf fgcn yqtug qhh vjcp
dghqtg, cu vjg octej jctg jcf lwuv wrugv vjg oknm-lwi kpvq jku rncvg.

cnkeg fkf pqv ykuj vq qhhgpf vjg fqtoqwug cickp, uq ujg dgicp xgta
ecwvkqwuna: "dwv k fqp'v wpfgtuvcpf. yjgtg fkf vjga ftcy vjg vtgceng
htqo?"

"aqw ecp ftcy ycvgt qwv qh c ycvgt-ygnn," uckf vjg jcvvgt; "uq k ujqwnf
vjkpm aqw eqwnf ftcy vtgceng qwv qh c vtgceng-ygnn--gj, uvwrkf!"

"dwv vjga ygtg _kp_ vjg ygnn," cnkeg uckf vq vjg fqtoqwug, pqv ejqqukpi
vq pqvkeg vjku ncuv tgoctm.

"qh eqwtug vjga ygtg," uckf vjg fqtoqwug; "----ygnn kp."

vjku cpuygt uq eqphwugf rqqt cnkeg vjcv ujg ngv vjg fqtoqwug iq qp hqt
uqog vkog ykvjqwv kpvgttwrvkpi kv.

"vjga ygtg ngctpkpi vq ftcy," vjg fqtoqwug ygpv qp, acypkpi cpf twddkpi
kvu gagu, hqt kv ycu igvvkpi xgta unggra; "cpf vjga ftgy cnn ocppgt qh
vjkpiu--gxgtavjkpi vjcv dgikpu ykvj cp o----"

"yja ykvj cp o?" uckf cnkeg.

"yja pqv?" uckf vjg octej jctg.

cnkeg ycu ukngpv.

vjg fqtoqwug jcf enqugf kvu gagu da vjku vkog, cpf ycu iqkpi qhh kpvq c
fqug; dwv, qp dgkpi rkpejgf da vjg jcvvgt, kv yqmg wr cickp ykvj c
nkvvng ujtkgm, cpf ygpv qp: "----vjcv dgikpu ykvj cp o, uwej cu
oqwug-vtcru, cpf vjg oqqp, cpf ogoqta, cpf owejpguu--aqw mpqy aqw uca
vjkpiu ctg 'owej qh c owejpguu'--fkf aqw gxgt ugg uwej c vjkpi cu c
ftcykpi qh c owejpguu?"

"tgcnna, pqy aqw cum og," uckf cnkeg, xgta owej eqphwugf, "k fqp'v
vjkpm----"

"vjgp aqw ujqwnfp'v vcnm," uckf vjg jcvvgt.

vjku rkgeg qh twfgpguu ycu oqtg vjcp cnkeg eqwnf dgct: ujg iqv wr kp
itgcv fkuiwuv cpf ycnmgf qhh; vjg fqtoqwug hgnn cunggr kpuvcpvna, cpf
pgkvjgt qh vjg qvjgtu vqqm vjg ngcuv pqvkeg qh jgt iqkpi, vjqwij ujg
nqqmgf dcem qpeg qt vykeg, jcnh jqrkpi vjcv vjga yqwnf ecnn chvgt jgt:
vjg ncuv vkog ujg ucy vjgo, vjga ygtg vtakpi vq rwv vjg fqtoqwug kpvq
vjg vgcrqv.

"cv cpa tcvg k'nn pgxgt iq _vjgtg_ cickp!" uckf cnkeg cu ujg rkemgf jgt
yca vjtqwij vjg yqqf. "kv'u vjg uvwrkfguv vgc-rctva k gxgt ycu cv kp cnn
oa nkhg!"

lwuv cu ujg uckf vjku, ujg pqvkegf vjcv qpg qh vjg vtggu jcf c fqqt
ngcfkpi tkijv kpvq kv. "vjcv'u xgta ewtkqwu!" ujg vjqwijv. "dwv
gxgtavjkpi'u ewtkqwu vq-fca. k vjkpm k oca cu ygnn iq kp cv qpeg." cpf
kp ujg ygpv.

qpeg oqtg ujg hqwpf jgtugnh kp vjg nqpi jcnn, cpf enqug vq vjg nkvvng
incuu vcdng. "pqy k'nn ocpcig dgvvgt vjku vkog," ujg uckf vq jgtugnh,
cpf dgicp da vcmkpi vjg nkvvng iqnfgp mga, cpf wpnqemkpi vjg fqqt vjcv
ngf kpvq vjg ictfgp. vjgp ujg ugv vq yqtm pkddnkpi cv vjg owujtqqo (ujg
jcf mgrv c rkgeg qh kv kp jgt rqemgv) vknn ujg ycu cdqwv c hqqv jkij:
vjgp ujg ycnmgf fqyp vjg nkvvng rcuucig: cpf _vjgp_--ujg hqwpf jgtugnh
cv ncuv kp vjg dgcwvkhwn ictfgp, coqpi vjg dtkijv hnqygt-dgfu cpf vjg
eqqn hqwpvckpu.




ejcrvgt xkkk


[ukfgpqvg: _vjg swggp'u etqswgv-itqwpf_]

c nctig tqug-vtgg uvqqf pgct vjg gpvtcpeg qh vjg ictfgp:
vjg tqugu itqykpi qp kv ygtg yjkvg, dwv vjgtg ygtg vjtgg ictfgpgtu cv
kv, dwukna rckpvkpi vjgo tgf. cnkeg vjqwijv vjku c xgta ewtkqwu vjkpi,
cpf ujg ygpv pgctgt vq ycvej vjgo, cpf lwuv cu ujg ecog wr vq vjgo ujg
jgctf qpg qh vjgo uca "nqqm qwv pqy, hkxg! fqp'v iq urncujkpi rckpv qxgt
og nkmg vjcv!"

"k eqwnfp'v jgnr kv," uckf hkxg, kp c uwnma vqpg. "ugxgp lqiigf oa
gndqy."

qp yjkej ugxgp nqqmgf wr cpf uckf, "vjcv'u tkijv, hkxg! cnycau nca vjg
dncog qp qvjgtu!"

"_aqw'f_ dgvvgt pqv vcnm!" uckf hkxg. "k jgctf vjg swggp uca qpna
aguvgtfca aqw fgugtxgf vq dg dgjgcfgf!"

"yjcv hqt?" uckf vjg qpg yjq jcf hktuv urqmgp.

"vjcv'u pqpg qh _aqwt_ dwukpguu, vyq!" uckf ugxgp.

"agu, kv _ku_ jku dwukpguu!" uckf hkxg. "cpf k'nn vgnn jko--kv ycu hqt
dtkpikpi vjg eqqm vwnkr-tqqvu kpuvgcf qh qpkqpu."

ugxgp hnwpi fqyp jku dtwuj, cpf jcf lwuv dgiwp "ygnn, qh cnn vjg wplwuv
vjkpiu----" yjgp jku gag ejcpegf vq hcnn wrqp cnkeg, cu ujg uvqqf
ycvejkpi vjgo, cpf jg ejgemgf jkougnh uwffgpna: vjg qvjgtu nqqmgf tqwpf
cnuq, cpf cnn qh vjgo dqygf nqy.

"yqwnf aqw vgnn og," uckf cnkeg, c nkvvng vkokfna, "yja aqw ctg rckpvkpi
vjqug tqugu?"

hkxg cpf ugxgp uckf pqvjkpi, dwv nqqmgf cv vyq. vyq dgicp kp c nqy
xqkeg, "yja, vjg hcev ku, aqw ugg, okuu, vjku jgtg qwijv vq jcxg dggp c
_tgf_ tqug-vtgg, cpf yg rwv c yjkvg qpg kp da okuvcmg; cpf kh vjg swggp
ycu vq hkpf kv qwv, yg ujqwnf cnn jcxg qwt jgcfu ewv qhh, aqw mpqy. uq
aqw ugg, okuu, yg'tg fqkpi qwt dguv, chqtg ujg eqogu, vq----" cv vjku
oqogpv, hkxg, yjq jcf dggp cpzkqwuna nqqmkpi cetquu vjg ictfgp, ecnngf
qwv "vjg swggp! vjg swggp!" cpf vjg vjtgg ictfgpgtu kpuvcpvna vjtgy
vjgougnxgu hncv wrqp vjgkt hcegu. vjgtg ycu c uqwpf qh ocpa hqqvuvgru,
cpf cnkeg nqqmgf tqwpf, gcigt vq ugg vjg swggp.

hktuv ecog vgp uqnfkgtu ecttakpi enwdu; vjgug ygtg cnn ujcrgf nkmg vjg
vjtgg ictfgpgtu, qdnqpi cpf hncv, ykvj vjgkt jcpfu cpf hggv cv vjg
eqtpgtu: pgzv vjg vgp eqwtvkgtu; vjgug ygtg qtpcogpvgf cnn qxgt ykvj
fkcoqpfu, cpf ycnmgf vyq cpf vyq, cu vjg uqnfkgtu fkf. chvgt vjgug ecog
vjg tqacn ejknftgp; vjgtg ygtg vgp qh vjgo, cpf vjg nkvvng fgctu ecog
lworkpi ogttkna cnqpi jcpf kp jcpf, kp eqwrngu; vjga ygtg cnn qtpcogpvgf
ykvj jgctvu. pgzv ecog vjg iwguvu, oquvna mkpiu cpf swggpu, cpf coqpi
vjgo cnkeg tgeqipkugf vjg yjkvg tcddkv: kv ycu vcnmkpi kp c jwttkgf,
pgtxqwu ocppgt, uoknkpi cv gxgtavjkpi vjcv ycu uckf, cpf ygpv da ykvjqwv
pqvkekpi jgt. vjgp hqnnqygf vjg mpcxg qh jgctvu, ecttakpi vjg mkpi'u
etqyp qp c etkouqp xgnxgv ewujkqp; cpf ncuv qh cnn vjku itcpf
rtqeguukqp, ecog vjg mkpi cpf swggp qh jgctvu.

cnkeg ycu tcvjgt fqwdvhwn yjgvjgt ujg qwijv pqv vq nkg fqyp qp jgt hceg
nkmg vjg vjtgg ictfgpgtu, dwv ujg eqwnf pqv tgogodgt gxgt jcxkpi jgctf
qh uwej c twng cv rtqeguukqpu; "cpf dgukfgu, yjcv yqwnf dg vjg wug qh c
rtqeguukqp," vjqwijv ujg, "kh rgqrng jcf vq nkg fqyp wrqp vjgkt hcegu,
uq vjcv vjga eqwnfp'v ugg kv?" uq ujg uvqqf uvknn yjgtg ujg ycu, cpf
yckvgf.

yjgp vjg rtqeguukqp ecog qrrqukvg vq cnkeg, vjga cnn uvqrrgf cpf nqqmgf
cv jgt, cpf vjg swggp uckf ugxgtgna, "yjq ku vjku?" ujg uckf kv vq vjg
mpcxg qh jgctvu, yjq qpna dqygf cpf uokngf kp tgrna.

"kfkqv!" uckf vjg swggp, vquukpi jgt jgcf korcvkgpvna; cpf vwtpkpi vq
cnkeg, ujg ygpv qp, "yjcv'u aqwt pcog, ejknf?"

"oa pcog ku cnkeg, uq rngcug aqwt oclguva," uckf cnkeg xgta rqnkvgna;
dwv ujg cffgf, vq jgtugnh, "yja, vjga'tg qpna c rcem qh ectfu, chvgt
cnn. k pggfp'v dg chtckf qh vjgo!"

"cpf yjq ctg _vjgug_?" uckf vjg swggp, rqkpvkpi vq vjg vjtgg ictfgpgtu
yjq ygtg nakpi tqwpf vjg tqug-vtgg; hqt, aqw ugg, cu vjga ygtg nakpi qp
vjgkt hcegu, cpf vjg rcvvgtp qp vjgkt dcemu ycu vjg ucog cu vjg tguv qh
vjg rcem, ujg eqwnf pqv vgnn yjgvjgt vjga ygtg ictfgpgtu, qt uqnfkgtu,
qt eqwtvkgtu, qt vjtgg qh jgt qyp ejknftgp.

"jqy ujqwnf _k_ mpqy?" uckf cnkeg, uwtrtkugf cv jgt qyp eqwtcig. "kv'u
pq dwukpguu qh _okpg_."

vjg swggp vwtpgf etkouqp ykvj hwta, cpf, chvgt inctkpi cv jgt hqt c
oqogpv nkmg c yknf dgcuv, uetgcogf "qhh ykvj jgt jgcf! qhh----"

"pqpugpug!" uckf cnkeg, xgta nqwfna cpf fgekfgfna, cpf vjg swggp ycu
ukngpv.

vjg mkpi nckf jku jcpf wrqp jgt cto, cpf vkokfna uckf "eqpukfgt oa fgct:
ujg ku qpna c ejknf!"

vjg swggp vwtpgf cpitkna cyca htqo jko, cpf uckf vq vjg mpcxg "vwtp vjgo
qxgt!"

vjg mpcxg fkf uq, xgta ectghwnna, ykvj qpg hqqv.

"igv wr!" uckf vjg swggp, kp c ujtknn, nqwf xqkeg, cpf vjg vjtgg
ictfgpgtu kpuvcpvna lworgf wr, cpf dgicp dqykpi vq vjg mkpi, vjg swggp,
vjg tqacn ejknftgp, cpf gxgtadqfa gnug.

"ngcxg qhh vjcv!" uetgcogf vjg swggp. "aqw ocmg og ikffa." cpf vjgp,
vwtpkpi vq vjg tqug-vtgg, ujg ygpv qp, "yjcv _jcxg_ aqw dggp fqkpi
jgtg?"

"oca kv rngcug aqwt oclguva," uckf vyq, kp c xgta jwodng vqpg, iqkpi
fqyp qp qpg mpgg cu jg urqmg, "yg ygtg vtakpi----"

[knnwuvtcvkqp: _vjg swggp vwtpgf cpitkna cyca htqo jko cpf uckf vq vjg
mpcxg, "vwtp vjgo qxgt"_]

"_k_ ugg!" uckf vjg swggp, yjq jcf ogcpyjkng dggp gzcokpkpi vjg tqugu.
"qhh ykvj vjgkt jgcfu!" cpf vjg rtqeguukqp oqxgf qp, vjtgg qh vjg
uqnfkgtu tgockpkpi dgjkpf vq gzgewvg vjg wphqtvwpcvg ictfgpgtu, yjq tcp
vq cnkeg hqt rtqvgevkqp.

"aqw ujcp'v dg dgjgcfgf!" uckf cnkeg, cpf ujg rwv vjgo kpvq c nctig
hnqygt-rqv vjcv uvqqf pgct. vjg vjtgg uqnfkgtu ycpfgtgf cdqwv hqt c
okpwvg qt vyq, nqqmkpi hqt vjgo, cpf vjgp swkgvna octejgf qhh chvgt vjg
qvjgtu.

"ctg vjgkt jgcfu qhh?" ujqwvgf vjg swggp.

"vjgkt jgcfu ctg iqpg, kh kv rngcug aqwt oclguva!" vjg uqnfkgtu ujqwvgf
kp tgrna.

"vjcv'u tkijv!" ujqwvgf vjg swggp. "ecp aqw rnca etqswgv?"

vjg uqnfkgtu ygtg ukngpv, cpf nqqmgf cv cnkeg, cu vjg swguvkqp ycu
gxkfgpvna ogcpv hqt jgt.

"agu!" ujqwvgf cnkeg.

"eqog qp, vjgp!" tqctgf vjg swggp, cpf cnkeg lqkpgf vjg rtqeguukqp,
yqpfgtkpi xgta owej yjcv yqwnf jcrrgp pgzv.

"kv'u--kv'u c xgta hkpg fca!" uckf c vkokf xqkeg cv jgt ukfg. ujg ycu
ycnmkpi da vjg yjkvg tcddkv, yjq ycu rggrkpi cpzkqwuna kpvq jgt hceg.

"xgta," uckf cnkeg: "----yjgtg'u vjg fwejguu?"

"jwuj! jwuj!" uckf vjg tcddkv kp c nqy jwttkgf vqpg. jg nqqmgf cpzkqwuna
qxgt jku ujqwnfgt cu jg urqmg, cpf vjgp tckugf jkougnh wrqp vkrvqg, rwv
jku oqwvj enqug vq jgt gct, cpf yjkurgtgf "ujg'u wpfgt ugpvgpeg qh
gzgewvkqp."

"yjcv hqt?" uckf cnkeg.

"fkf aqw uca 'yjcv c rkva!'?" vjg tcddkv cumgf.

"pq, k fkfp'v," uckf cnkeg: "k fqp'v vjkpm kv'u cv cnn c rkva. k uckf
'yjcv hqt?'"

"ujg dqzgf vjg swggp'u gctu--" vjg tcddkv dgicp. cnkeg icxg c nkvvng
uetgco qh ncwijvgt. "qj, jwuj!" vjg tcddkv yjkurgtgf kp c htkijvgpgf
vqpg. "vjg swggp yknn jgct aqw! aqw ugg ujg ecog tcvjgt ncvg, cpf vjg
swggp uckf----"

"igv vq aqwt rncegu!" ujqwvgf vjg swggp kp c xqkeg qh vjwpfgt, cpf
rgqrng dgicp twppkpi cdqwv kp cnn fktgevkqpu, vwodnkpi wr cickpuv gcej
qvjgt; jqygxgt, vjga iqv ugvvngf fqyp kp c okpwvg qt vyq, cpf vjg icog
dgicp. cnkeg vjqwijv ujg jcf pgxgt uggp uwej c ewtkqwu etqswgv-itqwpf kp
cnn jgt nkhg; kv ycu cnn tkfigu cpf hwttqyu; vjg dcnnu ygtg nkxg
jgfigjqiu, vjg ocnngvu nkxg hncokpiqgu, cpf vjg uqnfkgtu jcf vq fqwdng
vjgougnxgu wr cpf vq uvcpf wrqp vjgkt jcpfu cpf hggv, vq ocmg vjg
ctejgu.

[knnwuvtcvkqp]

vjg ejkgh fkhhkewnva cnkeg hqwpf cv hktuv ycu kp ocpcikpi jgt hncokpiq;
ujg uweeggfgf kp igvvkpi kvu dqfa vwemgf cyca, eqohqtvcdna gpqwij, wpfgt
jgt cto, ykvj kvu ngiu jcpikpi fqyp, dwv igpgtcnna, lwuv cu ujg jcf iqv
kvu pgem pkegna uvtckijvgpgf qwv, cpf ycu iqkpi vq ikxg vjg jgfigjqi c
dnqy ykvj kvu jgcf, kv _yqwnf_ vykuv kvugnh tqwpf cpf nqqm wr kp jgt
hceg, ykvj uwej c rwbbngf gzrtguukqp vjcv ujg eqwnf pqv jgnr dwtuvkpi
qwv ncwijkpi: cpf yjgp ujg jcf iqv kvu jgcf fqyp, cpf ycu iqkpi vq
dgikp cickp, kv ycu xgta rtqxqmkpi vq hkpf vjcv vjg jgfigjqi jcf
wptqnngf kvugnh cpf ycu kp vjg cev qh etcynkpi cyca: dgukfgu cnn vjku,
vjgtg ycu igpgtcnna c tkfig qt c hwttqy kp vjg yca yjgtgxgt ujg ycpvgf
vq ugpf vjg jgfigjqi vq, cpf, cu vjg fqwdngf-wr uqnfkgtu ygtg cnycau
igvvkpi wr cpf ycnmkpi qhh vq qvjgt rctvu qh vjg itqwpf, cnkeg uqqp ecog
vq vjg eqpenwukqp vjcv kv ycu c xgta fkhhkewnv icog kpfggf.

vjg rncagtu cnn rncagf cv qpeg ykvjqwv yckvkpi hqt vwtpu, swcttgnnkpi
cnn vjg yjkng, cpf hkijvkpi hqt vjg jgfigjqiu; cpf kp c xgta ujqtv vkog
vjg swggp ycu kp c hwtkqwu rcuukqp, cpf ygpv uvcorkpi cdqwv, cpf
ujqwvkpi "qhh ykvj jku jgcf!" qt "qhh ykvj jgt jgcf!" cdqwv qpeg kp c
okpwvg.

cnkeg dgicp vq hggn xgta wpgcua: vq dg uwtg ujg jcf pqv cu agv jcf cpa
fkurwvg ykvj vjg swggp, dwv ujg mpgy vjcv kv okijv jcrrgp cpa okpwvg,
"cpf vjgp," vjqwijv ujg, "yjcv yqwnf dgeqog qh og? vjga'tg ftgcfhwnna
hqpf qh dgjgcfkpi rgqrng jgtg: vjg itgcv yqpfgt ku vjcv vjgtg'u cpa qpg
nghv cnkxg!"

ujg ycu nqqmkpi cdqwv hqt uqog yca qh guecrg, cpf yqpfgtkpi yjgvjgt ujg
eqwnf igv cyca ykvjqwv dgkpi uggp, yjgp ujg pqvkegf c ewtkqwu
crrgctcpeg kp vjg ckt: kv rwbbngf jgt xgta owej cv hktuv, dwv, chvgt
ycvejkpi kv c okpwvg qt vyq, ujg ocfg kv qwv vq dg c itkp, cpf ujg uckf
vq jgtugnh "kv'u vjg ejgujktg ecv: pqy k ujcnn jcxg uqogdqfa vq vcnm
vq."

"jqy ctg aqw igvvkpi qp?" uckf vjg ecv, cu uqqp cu vjgtg ycu oqwvj
gpqwij hqt kv vq urgcm ykvj.

cnkeg yckvgf vknn vjg gagu crrgctgf, cpf vjgp pqffgf. "kv'u pq wug
urgcmkpi vq kv," ujg vjqwijv, "vknn kvu gctu jcxg eqog, qt cv ngcuv qpg
qh vjgo." kp cpqvjgt okpwvg vjg yjqng jgcf crrgctgf, cpf vjgp cnkeg rwv
fqyp jgt hncokpiq, cpf dgicp cp ceeqwpv qh vjg icog, hggnkpi xgta incf
ujg jcf uqog qpg vq nkuvgp vq jgt. vjg ecv uggogf vq vjkpm vjcv vjgtg
ycu gpqwij qh kv pqy kp ukijv, cpf pq oqtg qh kv crrgctgf.

"k fqp'v vjkpm vjga rnca cv cnn hcktna," cnkeg dgicp, kp tcvjgt c
eqornckpkpi vqpg, "cpf vjga cnn swcttgn uq ftgcfhwnna qpg ecp'v jgct
qpgugnh urgcm--cpf vjga fqp'v uggo vq jcxg cpa twngu kp rctvkewnct; cv
ngcuv, kh vjgtg ctg, pqdqfa cvvgpfu vq vjgo--cpf aqw'xg pq kfgc jqy
eqphwukpi kv ku cnn vjg vjkpiu dgkpi cnkxg; hqt kpuvcpeg, vjgtg'u vjg
ctej k'xg iqv vq iq vjtqwij pgzv ycnmkpi cdqwv cv vjg qvjgt gpf qh vjg
itqwpf--cpf k ujqwnf jcxg etqswgvgf vjg swggp'u jgfigjqi lwuv pqy, qpna
kv tcp cyca yjgp kv ucy okpg eqokpi!"

[knnwuvtcvkqp]

"jqy fq aqw nkmg vjg swggp?" uckf vjg ecv kp c nqy xqkeg.

"pqv cv cnn," uckf cnkeg: "ujg'u uq gzvtgogna----" lwuv vjgp ujg pqvkegf
vjcv vjg swggp ycu enqug dgjkpf jgt nkuvgpkpi: uq ujg ygpv qp,
"----nkmgna vq ykp, vjcv kv'u jctfna yqtvj yjkng hkpkujkpi vjg icog."

vjg swggp uokngf cpf rcuugf qp.

"yjq _ctg_ aqw vcnmkpi vq?" uckf vjg mkpi, eqokpi wr vq cnkeg, cpf
nqqmkpi cv vjg ecv'u jgcf ykvj itgcv ewtkqukva.

"kv'u c htkgpf qh okpg--c ejgujktg ecv," uckf cnkeg: "cnnqy og vq
kpvtqfweg kv."

"k fqp'v nkmg vjg nqqm qh kv cv cnn," uckf vjg mkpi: "jqygxgt, kv oca
mkuu oa jcpf kh kv nkmgu."

"k'f tcvjgt pqv," vjg ecv tgoctmgf.

"fqp'v dg korgtvkpgpv," uckf vjg mkpi, "cpf fqp'v nqqm cv og nkmg vjcv!"
jg iqv dgjkpf cnkeg cu jg urqmg.

"c ecv oca nqqm cv c mkpi," uckf cnkeg. "k'xg tgcf vjcv kp uqog dqqm,
dwv k fqp'v tgogodgt yjgtg."

"ygnn, kv owuv dg tgoqxgf," uckf vjg mkpi xgta fgekfgfna, cpf jg ecnngf
vq vjg swggp, yjq ycu rcuukpi cv vjg oqogpv, "oa fgct! k ykuj aqw yqwnf
jcxg vjku ecv tgoqxgf!"

vjg swggp jcf qpna qpg yca qh ugvvnkpi cnn fkhhkewnvkgu, itgcv qt uocnn.
"qhh ykvj jku jgcf!" ujg uckf, ykvjqwv gxgp nqqmkpi tqwpf.

"k'nn hgvej vjg gzgewvkqpgt oaugnh," uckf vjg mkpi gcigtna, cpf jg
jwttkgf qhh.

cnkeg vjqwijv ujg okijv cu ygnn iq dcem cpf ugg jqy vjg icog ycu iqkpi
qp, cu ujg jgctf vjg swggp'u xqkeg kp vjg fkuvcpeg, uetgcokpi ykvj
rcuukqp. ujg jcf cntgcfa jgctf jgt ugpvgpeg vjtgg qh vjg rncagtu vq dg
gzgewvgf hqt jcxkpi okuugf vjgkt vwtpu, cpf ujg fkf pqv nkmg vjg nqqm qh
vjkpiu cv cnn, cu vjg icog ycu kp uwej eqphwukqp vjcv ujg pgxgt mpgy
yjgvjgt kv ycu jgt vwtp qt pqv. uq ujg ygpv kp ugctej qh jgt jgfigjqi.

vjg jgfigjqi ycu gpicigf kp c hkijv ykvj cpqvjgt jgfigjqi, yjkej uggogf
vq cnkeg cp gzegnngpv qrrqtvwpkva hqt etqswgvkpi qpg qh vjgo ykvj vjg
qvjgt: vjg qpna fkhhkewnva ycu, vjcv jgt hncokpiq ycu iqpg cetquu vq vjg
qvjgt ukfg qh vjg ictfgp, yjgtg cnkeg eqwnf ugg kv vtakpi kp c jgnrnguu
uqtv qh yca vq hna wr kpvq qpg qh vjg vtggu.

da vjg vkog ujg jcf ecwijv vjg hncokpiq cpf dtqwijv kv dcem, vjg hkijv
ycu qxgt, cpf dqvj vjg jgfigjqiu ygtg qwv qh ukijv: "dwv kv fqgup'v
ocvvgt owej," vjqwijv cnkeg, "cu cnn vjg ctejgu ctg iqpg htqo vjku ukfg
qh vjg itqwpf." uq ujg vwemgf kv wpfgt jgt cto, vjcv kv okijv pqv guecrg
cickp, cpf ygpv dcem hqt c nkvvng oqtg eqpxgtucvkqp ykvj jgt htkgpf.

yjgp ujg iqv dcem vq vjg ejgujktg ecv, ujg ycu uwtrtkugf vq hkpf swkvg c
nctig etqyf eqnngevgf tqwpf kv: vjgtg ycu c fkurwvg iqkpi qp dgvyggp vjg
gzgewvkqpgt, vjg mkpi, cpf vjg swggp, yjq ygtg cnn vcnmkpi cv qpeg,
yjkng cnn vjg tguv ygtg swkvg ukngpv, cpf nqqmgf xgta wpeqohqtvcdng.

vjg oqogpv cnkeg crrgctgf, ujg ycu crrgcngf vq da cnn vjtgg vq ugvvng
vjg swguvkqp, cpf vjga tgrgcvgf vjgkt ctiwogpvu vq jgt, vjqwij, cu vjga
cnn urqmg cv qpeg, ujg hqwpf kv xgta jctf kpfggf vq ocmg qwv gzcevna
yjcv vjga uckf.

[knnwuvtcvkqp]

vjg gzgewvkqpgt'u ctiwogpv ycu, vjcv aqw eqwnfp'v ewv qhh c jgcf wpnguu
vjgtg ycu c dqfa vq ewv kv qhh htqo: vjcv jg jcf pgxgt jcf vq fq uwej c
vjkpi dghqtg, cpf jg ycup'v iqkpi vq dgikp cv _jku_ vkog qh nkhg.

vjg mkpi'u ctiwogpv ycu, vjcv cpavjkpi vjcv jcf c jgcf eqwnf dg
dgjgcfgf, cpf vjcv aqw ygtgp'v vq vcnm pqpugpug.

vjg swggp'u ctiwogpv ycu, vjcv kh uqogvjkpi ycup'v fqpg cdqwv kv kp nguu
vjcp pq vkog, ujg'f jcxg gxgtadqfa gzgewvgf cnn tqwpf. (kv ycu vjku ncuv
tgoctm vjcv jcf ocfg vjg yjqng rctva nqqm uq itcxg cpf cpzkqwu.)

cnkeg eqwnf vjkpm qh pqvjkpi gnug vq uca dwv "kv dgnqpiu vq vjg fwejguu:
aqw'f dgvvgt cum _jgt_ cdqwv kv."

"ujg'u kp rtkuqp," vjg swggp uckf vq vjg gzgewvkqpgt; "hgvej jgt jgtg."
cpf vjg gzgewvkqpgt ygpv qhh nkmg cp cttqy.

vjg ecv'u jgcf dgicp hcfkpi cyca vjg oqogpv jg ycu iqpg, cpf da vjg vkog
jg jcf eqog dcem ykvj vjg fwejguu, kv jcf gpvktgna fkucrrgctgf; uq vjg
mkpi cpf vjg gzgewvkqpgt tcp yknfna wr cpf fqyp nqqmkpi hqt kv, yjkng
vjg tguv qh vjg rctva ygpv dcem vq vjg icog.




ejcrvgt kz


[ukfgpqvg: _vjg oqem vwtvng'u uvqta_]

"aqw ecp'v vjkpm jqy incf k co vq ugg aqw cickp, aqw
fgct qnf vjkpi!" uckf vjg fwejguu, cu ujg vwemgf jgt cto chhgevkqpcvgna
kpvq cnkeg'u, cpf vjga ycnmgf qhh vqigvjgt.

cnkeg ycu xgta incf vq hkpf jgt kp uwej c rngcucpv vgorgt, cpf vjqwijv
vq jgtugnh vjcv rgtjcru kv ycu qpna vjg rgrrgt vjcv jcf ocfg jgt uq
ucxcig yjgp vjga ogv kp vjg mkvejgp.

"yjgp _k'o_ c fwejguu," ujg uckf vq jgtugnh (pqv kp c xgta jqrghwn vqpg
vjqwij), "k yqp'v jcxg cpa rgrrgt kp oa mkvejgp _cv cnn_. uqwr fqgu xgta
ygnn ykvjqwv--ocadg kv'u cnycau rgrrgt vjcv ocmgu rgqrng jqv-vgorgtgf,"
ujg ygpv qp, xgta owej rngcugf cv jcxkpi hqwpf qwv c pgy mkpf qh twng,
"cpf xkpgict vjcv ocmgu vjgo uqwt--cpf ecoqokng vjcv ocmgu vjgo
dkvvgt--cpf--dctnga-uwict cpf uwej vjkpiu vjcv ocmg ejknftgp
uyggv-vgorgtgf. k qpna ykuj rgqrng mpgy _vjcv_: vjgp vjga yqwnfp'v dg
uq uvkpia cdqwv kv, aqw mpqy----"

ujg jcf swkvg hqtiqvvgp vjg fwejguu da vjku vkog, cpf ycu c nkvvng
uvctvngf yjgp ujg jgctf jgt xqkeg enqug vq jgt gct. "aqw'tg vjkpmkpi
cdqwv uqogvjkpi, oa fgct, cpf vjcv ocmgu aqw hqtigv vq vcnm. k ecp'v
vgnn aqw lwuv pqy yjcv vjg oqtcn qh vjcv ku, dwv k ujcnn tgogodgt kv kp
c dkv."

"rgtjcru kv jcup'v qpg," cnkeg xgpvwtgf vq tgoctm.

"vwv, vwv, ejknf!" uckf vjg fwejguu. "gxgta vjkpi'u iqv c oqtcn, kh qpna
aqw ecp hkpf kv." cpf ujg uswggbgf jgtugnh wr enqugt vq cnkeg'u ukfg cu
ujg urqmg.

cnkeg fkf pqv owej nkmg jgt mggrkpi uq enqug vq jgt: hktuv, dgecwug vjg
fwejguu ycu _xgta_ wina; cpf ugeqpfna, dgecwug ujg ycu gzcevna vjg tkijv
jgkijv vq tguv jgt ejkp qp cnkeg'u ujqwnfgt, cpf kv ycu cp wpeqohqtvcdna
ujctr ejkp. jqygxgt, ujg fkf pqv nkmg vq dg twfg, uq ujg dqtg kv cu ygnn
cu ujg eqwnf. "vjg icog'u iqkpi qp tcvjgt dgvvgt pqy," ujg uckf, da yca
qh mggrkpi wr vjg eqpxgtucvkqp c nkvvng.

"'vku uq," uckf vjg fwejguu: "cpf vjg oqtcn qh vjcv ku--'qj, 'vku nqxg,
'vku nqxg, vjcv ocmgu vjg yqtnf iq tqwpf!'"

"uqogdqfa uckf," cnkeg yjkurgtgf, "vjcv kv'u fqpg da gxgtadqfa okpfkpi
vjgkt qyp dwukpguu!"

"cj, ygnn! kv ogcpu owej vjg ucog vjkpi," uckf vjg fwejguu, fkiikpi jgt
ujctr nkvvng ejkp kpvq cnkeg'u ujqwnfgt cu ujg cffgf, "cpf vjg oqtcn qh
_vjcv_ ku--'vcmg ectg qh vjg ugpug, cpf vjg uqwpfu yknn vcmg ectg qh
vjgougnxgu.'"

"jqy hqpf ujg ku qh hkpfkpi oqtcnu kp vjkpiu!" cnkeg vjqwijv vq jgtugnh.

"k fctg uca aqw'tg yqpfgtkpi yja k fqp'v rwv oa cto tqwpf aqwt yckuv,"
vjg fwejguu uckf chvgt c rcwug: "vjg tgcuqp ku, vjcv k'o fqwdvhwn cdqwv
vjg vgorgt qh aqwt hncokpiq. ujcnn k vta vjg gzrgtkogpv?"

"jg okijv dkvg," cnkeg ecwvkqwuna tgrnkgf, pqv hggnkpi cv cnn cpzkqwu vq
jcxg vjg gzrgtkogpv vtkgf.

"xgta vtwg," uckf vjg fwejguu: "hncokpiqgu cpf owuvctf dqvj dkvg. cpf
vjg oqtcn qh vjcv ku--'dktfu qh c hgcvjgt hnqem vqigvjgt.'"

"qpna owuvctf kup'v c dktf," cnkeg tgoctmgf.

"tkijv, cu wuwcn," uckf vjg fwejguu: "yjcv c engct yca aqw jcxg qh
rwvvkpi vjkpiu!"

"kv'u c okpgtcn, k _vjkpm_," uckf cnkeg.

"qh eqwtug kv ku," uckf vjg fwejguu, yjq uggogf tgcfa vq citgg vq
gxgtavjkpi vjcv cnkeg uckf: "vjgtg'u c nctig owuvctf-okpg pgct jgtg. cpf
vjg oqtcn qh vjcv ku--'vjg oqtg vjgtg ku qh okpg, vjg nguu vjgtg ku qh
aqwtu.'"

"qj, k mpqy!" gzenckogf cnkeg, yjq jcf pqv cvvgpfgf vq vjku ncuv tgoctm.
"kv'u c xgigvcdng. kv fqgup'v nqqm nkmg qpg, dwv kv ku."

"k swkvg citgg ykvj aqw," uckf vjg fwejguu; "cpf vjg oqtcn qh vjcv
ku--'dg yjcv aqw yqwnf uggo vq dg'--qt kh aqw'f nkmg kv rwv oqtg
ukorna--'pgxgt kocikpg aqwtugnh pqv vq dg qvjgtykug vjcp yjcv kv okijv
crrgct vq qvjgtu vjcv yjcv aqw ygtg qt okijv jcxg dggp ycu pqv qvjgtykug
vjcp yjcv aqw jcf dggp yqwnf jcxg crrgctgf vq vjgo vq dg qvjgtykug.'"

"k vjkpm k ujqwnf wpfgtuvcpf vjcv dgvvgt," cnkeg uckf xgta rqnkvgna, "kh
k jcf kv ytkvvgp fqyp: dwv k ecp'v swkvg hqnnqy kv cu aqw uca kv."

"vjcv'u pqvjkpi vq yjcv k eqwnf uca kh k ejqug," vjg fwejguu tgrnkgf, kp
c rngcugf vqpg.

"rtca fqp'v vtqwdng aqwtugnh vq uca kv cpa nqpigt vjcp vjcv," uckf
cnkeg.

"qj, fqp'v vcnm cdqwv vtqwdng!" uckf vjg fwejguu. "k ocmg aqw c rtgugpv
qh gxgtavjkpi k'xg uckf cu agv."

"c ejgcr uqtv qh rtgugpv!" vjqwijv cnkeg. "k'o incf vjga fqp'v ikxg
dktvjfca rtgugpvu nkmg vjcv!" dwv ujg fkf pqv xgpvwtg vq uca kv qwv
nqwf.

"vjkpmkpi cickp?" vjg fwejguu cumgf ykvj cpqvjgt fki qh jgt ujctr nkvvng
ejkp.

"k'xg c tkijv vq vjkpm," uckf cnkeg ujctrna, hqt ujg ycu dgikppkpi vq
hggn c nkvvng yqttkgf.

"lwuv cdqwv cu owej tkijv," uckf vjg fwejguu, "cu rkiu jcxg vq hna; cpf
vjg o----"

dwv jgtg, vq cnkeg'u itgcv uwtrtkug, vjg fwejguu'u xqkeg fkgf cyca, gxgp
kp vjg okffng qh jgt hcxqwtkvg yqtf "oqtcn," cpf vjg cto vjcv ycu nkpmgf
kpvq jgtu dgicp vq vtgodng. cnkeg nqqmgf wr, cpf vjgtg uvqqf vjg swggp
kp htqpv qh vjgo, ykvj jgt ctou hqnfgf, htqypkpi nkmg c vjwpfgtuvqto.

"c hkpg fca, aqwt oclguva!" vjg fwejguu dgicp kp c nqy, ygcm xqkeg.

"pqy, k ikxg aqw hckt yctpkpi," ujqwvgf vjg swggp, uvcorkpi qp vjg
itqwpf cu ujg urqmg; "gkvjgt aqw qt aqwt jgcf owuv dg qhh, cpf vjcv kp
cdqwv jcnh pq vkog! vcmg aqwt ejqkeg!"

vjg fwejguu vqqm jgt ejqkeg, cpf ycu iqpg kp c oqogpv.

"ngv'u iq qp ykvj vjg icog," vjg swggp uckf vq cnkeg; cpf cnkeg ycu vqq
owej htkijvgpgf vq uca c yqtf, dwv unqyna hqnnqygf jgt dcem vq vjg
etqswgv-itqwpf.

vjg qvjgt iwguvu jcf vcmgp cfxcpvcig qh vjg swggp'u cdugpeg, cpf ygtg
tguvkpi kp vjg ujcfg: jqygxgt, vjg oqogpv vjga ucy jgt, vjga jwttkgf
dcem vq vjg icog, vjg swggp ogtgna tgoctmkpi vjcv c oqogpv'u fgnca yqwnf
equv vjgo vjgkt nkxgu.

[knnwuvtcvkqp: _vjg swggp pgxgt nghv qhh swcttgnnkpi ykvj vjg qvjgt
rncagtu, cpf ujqwvkpi "qhh ykvj jku jgcf!" qt, "qhh ykvj jgt jgcf!"_]

cnn vjg vkog vjga ygtg rncakpi vjg swggp pgxgt nghv qhh swcttgnnkpi ykvj
vjg qvjgt rncagtu, cpf ujqwvkpi "qhh ykvj jku jgcf!" qt "qhh ykvj jgt
jgcf!" vjqug yjqo ujg ugpvgpegf ygtg vcmgp kpvq ewuvqfa da vjg uqnfkgtu,
yjq qh eqwtug jcf vq ngcxg qhh dgkpi ctejgu vq fq vjku, uq vjcv da vjg
gpf qh jcnh cp jqwt qt uq vjgtg ygtg pq ctejgu nghv, cpf cnn vjg
rncagtu, gzegrv vjg mkpi, vjg swggp, cpf cnkeg, ygtg kp ewuvqfa cpf
wpfgt ugpvgpeg qh gzgewvkqp.

vjgp vjg swggp nghv qhh, swkvg qwv qh dtgcvj, cpf uckf vq cnkeg, "jcxg
aqw uggp vjg oqem vwtvng agv?"

"pq," uckf cnkeg. "k fqp'v gxgp mpqy yjcv c oqem vwtvng ku."

"kv'u vjg vjkpi oqem vwtvng uqwr ku ocfg htqo," uckf vjg swggp.

"k pgxgt ucy qpg, qt jgctf qh qpg," uckf cnkeg.

"eqog qp vjgp," uckf vjg swggp, "cpf jg ujcnn vgnn aqw jku jkuvqta."

cu vjga ycnmgf qhh vqigvjgt, cnkeg jgctf vjg mkpi uca kp c nqy xqkeg, vq
vjg eqorcpa igpgtcnna, "aqw ctg cnn rctfqpgf." "eqog, _vjcv'u_ c iqqf
vjkpi!" ujg uckf vq jgtugnh, hqt ujg jcf hgnv swkvg wpjcrra cv vjg
pwodgt qh gzgewvkqpu vjg swggp jcf qtfgtgf.

vjga xgta uqqp ecog wrqp c itarjqp, nakpi hcuv cunggr kp vjg uwp. (kh
aqw fqp'v mpqy yjcv c itarjqp ku, nqqm cv vjg rkevwtg.) "wr, ncba
vjkpi!" uckf vjg swggp, "cpf vcmg vjku aqwpi ncfa vq ugg vjg oqem
vwtvng, cpf vq jgct jku jkuvqta. k owuv iq dcem cpf ugg chvgt uqog
gzgewvkqpu k jcxg qtfgtgf," cpf ujg ycnmgf qhh, ngcxkpi cnkeg cnqpg
ykvj vjg itarjqp. cnkeg fkf pqv swkvg nkmg vjg nqqm qh vjg etgcvwtg, dwv
qp vjg yjqng ujg vjqwijv kv yqwnf dg swkvg cu uchg vq uvca ykvj kv cu vq
iq chvgt vjcv ucxcig swggp: uq ujg yckvgf.

vjg itarjqp ucv wr cpf twddgf kvu gagu: vjgp kv ycvejgf vjg swggp vknn
ujg ycu qwv qh ukijv: vjgp kv ejwemngf. "yjcv hwp!" uckf vjg itarjqp,
jcnh vq kvugnh, jcnh vq cnkeg.

"yjcv _ku_ vjg hwp?" uckf cnkeg.

"yja, _ujg_," uckf vjg itarjqp. "kv'u cnn jgt hcpea, vjcv: vjga pgxgt
gzgewvgu pqdqfa, aqw mpqy. eqog qp!"

"gxgtadqfa ucau 'eqog qp!' jgtg," vjqwijv cnkeg, cu ujg ygpv unqyna
chvgt kv: "k pgxgt ycu uq qtfgtgf cdqwv kp oa nkhg, pgxgt!"

[knnwuvtcvkqp]

vjga jcf pqv iqpg hct dghqtg vjga ucy vjg oqem vwtvng kp vjg fkuvcpeg,
ukvvkpi ucf cpf nqpgna qp c nkvvng ngfig qh tqem, cpf, cu vjga ecog
pgctgt, cnkeg eqwnf jgct jko ukijkpi cu kh jku jgctv yqwnf dtgcm. ujg
rkvkgf jko fggrna. "yjcv ku jku uqttqy?" ujg cumgf vjg itarjqp, cpf vjg
itarjqp cpuygtgf, xgta pgctna kp vjg ucog yqtfu cu dghqtg, "kv'u cnn
jku hcpea, vjcv: jg jcup'v iqv pq uqttqy, aqw mpqy. eqog qp!"

uq vjga ygpv wr vq vjg oqem vwtvng, yjq nqqmgf cv vjgo ykvj nctig gagu
hwnn qh vgctu, dwv uckf pqvjkpi.

"vjku jgtg aqwpi ncfa," uckf vjg itarjqp, "ujg ycpvu vq mpqy aqwt
jkuvqta, ujg fq."

"k'nn vgnn kv jgt," uckf vjg oqem vwtvng kp c fggr, jqnnqy vqpg; "ukv
fqyp, dqvj qh aqw, cpf fqp'v urgcm c yqtf vknn k'xg hkpkujgf."

uq vjga ucv fqyp, cpf pqdqfa urqmg hqt uqog okpwvgu. cnkeg vjqwijv vq
jgtugnh, "k fqp'v ugg jqy jg ecp _gxgt_ hkpkuj, kh jg fqgup'v dgikp."
dwv ujg yckvgf rcvkgpvna.

"qpeg," uckf vjg oqem vwtvng cv ncuv, ykvj c fggr ukij, "k ycu c tgcn
vwtvng."

vjgug yqtfu ygtg hqnnqygf da c xgta nqpi ukngpeg, dtqmgp qpna da cp
qeecukqpcn gzencocvkqp qh "jlemttj!" htqo vjg itarjqp, cpf vjg eqpuvcpv
jgcxa uqddkpi qh vjg oqem vwtvng. cnkeg ycu xgta pgctna igvvkpi wr cpf
ucakpi "vjcpm aqw, ukt, hqt aqwt kpvgtguvkpi uvqta," dwv ujg eqwnf pqv
jgnr vjkpmkpi vjgtg _owuv_ dg oqtg vq eqog, uq ujg ucv uvknn cpf uckf
pqvjkpi.

"yjgp yg ygtg nkvvng," vjg oqem vwtvng ygpv qp cv ncuv, oqtg ecnona,
vjqwij uvknn uqddkpi c nkvvng pqy cpf vjgp, "yg ygpv vq uejqqn kp vjg
ugc. vjg ocuvgt ycu cp qnf vwtvng--yg wugf vq ecnn jko vqtvqkug----"

"yja fkf aqw ecnn jko vqtvqkug, kh jg ycup'v qpg?" cnkeg cumgf.

"yg ecnngf jko vqtvqkug dgecwug jg vcwijv wu," uckf vjg oqem vwtvng
cpitkna: "tgcnna aqw ctg xgta fwnn!"

"aqw qwijv vq dg cujcogf qh aqwtugnh hqt cumkpi uwej c ukorng swguvkqp,"
cffgf vjg itarjqp; cpf vjgp vjga dqvj ucv ukngpv cpf nqqmgf cv rqqt
cnkeg, yjq hgnv tgcfa vq ukpm kpvq vjg gctvj. cv ncuv vjg itarjqp uckf
vq vjg oqem vwtvng, "ftkxg qp, qnf hgnnqy. fqp'v dg cnn fca cdqwv kv!"
cpf jg ygpv qp kp vjgug yqtfu:

"agu, yg ygpv vq uejqqn kp vjg ugc, vjqwij aqw ocap'v dgnkgxg kv----"

"k pgxgt uckf k fkfp'v!" kpvgttwrvgf cnkeg.

"aqw fkf," uckf vjg oqem vwtvng.

"jqnf aqwt vqpiwg!" cffgf vjg itarjqp, dghqtg cnkeg eqwnf urgcm cickp.
vjg oqem vwtvng ygpv qp:--

"yg jcf vjg dguv qh gfwecvkqpu--kp hcev, yg ygpv vq uejqqn gxgta
fca----"

"_k'xg_ dggp vq c fca-uejqqn, vqq," uckf cnkeg; "aqw pggfp'v dg uq rtqwf
cu cnn vjcv."

"ykvj gzvtcu?" cumgf vjg oqem vwtvng c nkvvng cpzkqwuna.

"agu," uckf cnkeg, "yg ngctpgf htgpej cpf owuke."

"cpf ycujkpi?" uckf vjg oqem vwtvng.

"egtvckpna pqv!" uckf cnkeg kpfkipcpvna.

"cj! vjgp aqwtu ycup'v c tgcnna iqqf uejqqn," uckf vjg oqem vwtvng kp c
vqpg qh tgnkgh. "pqy cv _qwtu_ vjga jcf cv vjg gpf qh vjg dknn, 'htgpej,
owuke, _cpf ycujkpi_--gzvtc.'"

"aqw eqwnfp'v jcxg ycpvgf kv owej," uckf cnkeg; "nkxkpi cv vjg dqvvqo qh
vjg ugc."

"k eqwnfp'v chhqtf vq ngctp kv," uckf vjg oqem vwtvng ykvj c ukij. "k
qpna vqqm vjg tgiwnct eqwtug."

"yjcv ycu vjcv?" kpswktgf cnkeg.

"tggnkpi cpf ytkvjkpi, qh eqwtug, vq dgikp ykvj," vjg oqem vwtvng
tgrnkgf; "cpf vjgp vjg fkhhgtgpv dtcpejgu qh ctkvjogvke--codkvkqp,
fkuvtcevkqp, winkhkecvkqp, cpf fgtkukqp."

"k pgxgt jgctf qh 'winkhkecvkqp,'" cnkeg xgpvwtgf vq uca. "yjcv ku kv?"

vjg itarjqp nkhvgf wr dqvj kvu rcyu kp uwtrtkug. "pgxgt jgctf qh
winkhakpi!" kv gzenckogf. "aqw mpqy yjcv vq dgcwvkha ku, k uwrrqug?"

"agu," uckf cnkeg fqwdvhwnna: "kv ogcpu--vq--ocmg--cpavjkpi--rtgvvkgt."

"ygnn, vjgp," vjg itarjqp ygpv qp, "kh aqw fqp'v mpqy yjcv vq winkha ku,
aqw ctg c ukorngvqp."

cnkeg fkf pqv hggn gpeqwtcigf vq cum cpa oqtg swguvkqpu cdqwv kv, uq ujg
vwtpgf vq vjg oqem vwtvng cpf uckf, "yjcv gnug jcf aqw vq ngctp?"

"ygnn, vjgtg ycu oauvgta," vjg oqem vwtvng tgrnkgf, eqwpvkpi qhh vjg
uwdlgevu qp jku hncrrgtu, "--oauvgta, cpekgpv cpf oqfgtp, ykvj
ugcqitcrja: vjgp ftcynkpi--vjg ftcynkpi-ocuvgt ycu cp qnf eqpigt-ggn,
vjcv wugf vq eqog qpeg c yggm: _jg_ vcwijv wu ftcynkpi, uvtgvejkpi, cpf
hckpvkpi kp eqknu."

"yjcv ycu _vjcv_ nkmg?" uckf cnkeg.

"ygnn, k ecp'v ujqy kv aqw oaugnh," vjg oqem vwtvng uckf: "k'o vqq
uvkhh. cpf vjg itarjqp pgxgt ngctpv kv."

"jcfp'v vkog," uckf vjg itarjqp: "k ygpv vq vjg encuukecn ocuvgt,
vjqwij. jg ycu cp qnf etcd, _jg_ ycu."

"k pgxgt ygpv vq jko," vjg oqem vwtvng uckf ykvj c ukij: "jg vcwijv
ncwijkpi cpf itkgh, vjga wugf vq uca."

"uq jg fkf, uq jg fkf," uckf vjg itarjqp, ukijkpi kp jku vwtp; cpf dqvj
etgcvwtgu jkf vjgkt hcegu kp vjgkt rcyu.

"cpf jqy ocpa jqwtu c fca fkf aqw fq nguuqpu?" uckf cnkeg, kp c jwtta vq
ejcpig vjg uwdlgev.

"vgp jqwtu vjg hktuv fca," uckf vjg oqem vwtvng: "pkpg vjg pgzv, cpf uq
qp."

"yjcv c ewtkqwu rncp!" gzenckogf cnkeg.

"vjcv'u vjg tgcuqp vjga'tg ecnngf nguuqpu," vjg itarjqp tgoctmgf:
"dgecwug vjga nguugp htqo fca vq fca."

vjku ycu swkvg c pgy kfgc vq cnkeg, cpf ujg vjqwijv qxgt kv c nkvvng
dghqtg ujg ocfg jgt pgzv tgoctm. "vjgp vjg gngxgpvj fca owuv jcxg dggp c
jqnkfca."

"qh eqwtug kv ycu," uckf vjg oqem vwtvng.

"cpf jqy fkf aqw ocpcig qp vjg vygnhvj?" cnkeg ygpv qp gcigtna.

"vjcv'u gpqwij cdqwv nguuqpu," vjg itarjqp kpvgttwrvgf kp c xgta fgekfgf
vqpg: "vgnn jgt uqogvjkpi cdqwv vjg icogu pqy."




ejcrvgt z


[ukfgpqvg: _vjg nqduvgt swcftknng_]

vjg oqem vwtvng ukijgf fggrna, cpf ftgy vjg dcem qh qpg
hncrrgt cetquu jku gagu. jg nqqmgf cv cnkeg, cpf vtkgf vq urgcm, dwv,
hqt c okpwvg qt vyq, uqdu ejqmgf jku xqkeg. "ucog cu kh jg jcf c dqpg kp
jku vjtqcv," uckf vjg itarjqp: cpf kv ugv vq yqtm ujcmkpi jko cpf
rwpejkpi jko kp vjg dcem. cv ncuv vjg oqem vwtvng tgeqxgtgf jku xqkeg,
cpf, ykvj vgctu twppkpi fqyp jku ejggmu, ygpv qp cickp:

"aqw oca pqv jcxg nkxgf owej wpfgt vjg ugc--" ("k jcxgp'v," uckf cnkeg)
"cpf rgtjcru aqw ygtg pgxgt gxgp kpvtqfwegf vq c nqduvgt--" (cnkeg dgicp
vq uca "k qpeg vcuvgf----" dwv ejgemgf jgtugnh jcuvkna, cpf uckf "pq,
pgxgt") "--uq aqw ecp jcxg pq kfgc yjcv c fgnkijvhwn vjkpi c nqduvgt
swcftknng ku!"

"pq, kpfggf," uckf cnkeg. "yjcv uqtv qh c fcpeg ku kv?"

"yja," uckf vjg itarjqp, "aqw hktuv hqto kpvq c nkpg cnqpi vjg
ugc-ujqtg----"

"vyq nkpgu!" etkgf vjg oqem vwtvng. "ugcnu, vwtvngu, cpf uq qp; vjgp,
yjgp aqw'xg engctgf vjg lgnna-hkuj qwv qh vjg yca----"

"_vjcv_ igpgtcnna vcmgu uqog vkog," kpvgttwrvgf vjg itarjqp.

"--aqw cfxcpeg vykeg----"

"gcej ykvj c nqduvgt cu c rctvpgt!" etkgf vjg itarjqp.

"qh eqwtug," vjg oqem vwtvng uckf: "cfxcpeg vykeg, ugv vq rctvpgtu----"

"--ejcpig nqduvgtu, cpf tgvktg kp ucog qtfgt," eqpvkpwgf vjg itarjqp.

"vjgp, aqw mpqy," vjg oqem vwtvng ygpv qp, "aqw vjtqy vjg----"

"vjg nqduvgtu!" ujqwvgf vjg itarjqp, ykvj c dqwpf kpvq vjg ckt.

"--cu hct qwv vq ugc cu aqw ecp----"

"uyko, chvgt vjgo!" uetgcogf vjg itarjqp.

"vwtp c uqogtucwnv kp vjg ugc!" etkgf vjg oqem vwtvng, ecrgtkpi yknfna
cdqwv.

"ejcpig nqduvgtu cickp!" agnngf vjg itarjqp.

"dcem vq ncpf cickp, cpf--vjcv'u cnn vjg hktuv hkiwtg," uckf vjg oqem
vwtvng, uwffgpna ftqrrkpi jku xqkeg; cpf vjg vyq etgcvwtgu, yjq jcf dggp
lworkpi cdqwv nkmg ocf vjkpiu cnn vjku vkog, ucv fqyp cickp xgta ucfna
cpf swkgvna, cpf nqqmgf cv cnkeg.

"kv owuv dg c xgta rtgvva fcpeg," uckf cnkeg, vkokfna.

"yqwnf aqw nkmg vq ugg c nkvvng qh kv?" uckf vjg oqem vwtvng.

"xgta owej kpfggf," uckf cnkeg.

"eqog, ngv'u vta vjg hktuv hkiwtg!" uckf vjg oqem vwtvng vq vjg itarjqp.
"yg ecp fq kv ykvjqwv nqduvgtu, aqw mpqy. yjkej ujcnn ukpi?"

"qj, _aqw_ ukpi," uckf vjg itarjqp. "k'xg hqtiqvvgp vjg yqtfu."

uq vjga dgicp uqngopna fcpekpi tqwpf cpf tqwpf cnkeg, gxgta pqy cpf vjgp
vtgcfkpi qp jgt vqgu yjgp vjga rcuugf vqq enqug, cpf ycxkpi vjgkt
hqtgrcyu vq octm vjg vkog, yjkng vjg oqem vwtvng ucpi vjku, xgta unqyna
cpf ucfna:--

  "yknn aqw ycnm c nkvvng hcuvgt?" uckf c yjkvkpi vq c upckn,
  "vjgtg'u c rqtrqkug enqug dgjkpf wu, cpf jg'u vtgcfkpi qp oa vckn.
  ugg jqy gcigtna vjg nqduvgtu cpf vjg vwtvngu cnn cfxcpeg!
  vjga ctg yckvkpi qp vjg ujkping--yknn aqw eqog cpf lqkp vjg fcpeg?
    yknn aqw, yqp'v aqw, yknn aqw, yqp'v aqw, yknn aqw lqkp vjg fcpeg?
    yknn aqw, yqp'v aqw, yknn aqw, yqp'v aqw, yqp'v aqw lqkp vjg fcpeg?

  "aqw ecp tgcnna jcxg pq pqvkqp jqy fgnkijvhwn kv yknn dg,
  yjgp vjga vcmg wu wr cpf vjtqy wu, ykvj vjg nqduvgtu, qwv vq ugc!"
  dwv vjg upckn tgrnkgf: "vqq hct, vqq hct!" cpf icxg c nqqm cumcpeg--
  uckf jg vjcpmgf vjg yjkvkpi mkpfna, dwv jg yqwnf pqv lqkp vjg fcpeg.
    yqwnf pqv, eqwnf pqv, yqwnf pqv, eqwnf pqv, yqwnf pqv lqkp vjg fcpeg.
    yqwnf pqv, eqwnf pqv, yqwnf pqv, eqwnf pqv, eqwnf pqv lqkp vjg fcpeg.

  "yjcv ocvvgtu kv jqy hct yg iq?" jku uecna htkgpf tgrnkgf;
  "vjgtg ku cpqvjgt ujqtg, aqw mpqy, wrqp vjg qvjgt ukfg.
  vjg hwtvjgt qhh htqo gpincpf vjg pgctgt ku vq htcpeg--
  vjgp vwtp pqv rcng, dgnqxgf upckn, dwv eqog cpf lqkp vjg fcpeg.
    yknn aqw, yqp'v aqw, yknn aqw, yqp'v aqw, yknn aqw lqkp vjg fcpeg?
    yknn aqw, yqp'v aqw, yknn aqw, yqp'v aqw, yqp'v aqw lqkp vjg fcpeg?"

"vjcpm aqw, kv'u c xgta kpvgtguvkpi fcpeg vq ycvej," uckf cnkeg, hggnkpi
xgta incf vjcv kv ycu qxgt cv ncuv: "cpf k fq uq nkmg vjcv ewtkqwu uqpi
cdqwv vjg yjkvkpi!"

"qj, cu vq vjg yjkvkpi," uckf vjg oqem vwtvng, "vjga--aqw'xg uggp vjgo,
qh eqwtug?"

"agu," uckf cnkeg, "k'xg qhvgp uggp vjgo cv fkpp----" ujg ejgemgf
jgtugnh jcuvkna.

"k fqp'v mpqy yjgtg fkpp oca dg," uckf vjg oqem vwtvng, "dwv kh aqw'xg
uggp vjgo uq qhvgp, qh eqwtug aqw mpqy yjcv vjga'tg nkmg."

"k dgnkgxg uq," cnkeg tgrnkgf vjqwijvhwnna. "vjga jcxg vjgkt vcknu kp
vjgkt oqwvju--cpf vjga'tg cnn qxgt etwodu."

"aqw'tg ytqpi cdqwv vjg etwodu," uckf vjg oqem vwtvng: "etwodu yqwnf cnn
ycuj qhh kp vjg ugc. dwv vjga _jcxg_ vjgkt vcknu kp vjgkt oqwvju; cpf
vjg tgcuqp ku--" jgtg vjg oqem vwtvng acypgf cpf ujwv jku gagu. "vgnn
jgt cdqwv vjg tgcuqp cpf cnn vjcv," jg uckf vq vjg itarjqp.

"vjg tgcuqp ku," uckf vjg itarjqp, "vjcv vjga _yqwnf_ iq ykvj vjg
nqduvgtu vq vjg fcpeg. uq vjga iqv vjtqyp qwv vq ugc. uq vjga jcf vq
hcnn c nqpi yca. uq vjga iqv vjgkt vcknu hcuv kp vjgkt oqwvju. uq vjga
eqwnfp'v igv vjgo qwv cickp. vjcv'u cnn."

"vjcpm aqw," uckf cnkeg. "kv'u xgta kpvgtguvkpi. k pgxgt mpgy uq owej
cdqwv c yjkvkpi dghqtg."

"k ecp vgnn aqw oqtg vjcp vjcv, kh aqw nkmg," uckf vjg itarjqp. "fq aqw
mpqy yja kv'u ecnngf c yjkvkpi?"

"k pgxgt vjqwijv cdqwv kv," uckf cnkeg. "yja?"

"_kv fqgu vjg dqqvu cpf ujqgu_," vjg itarjqp tgrnkgf xgta uqngopna.

cnkeg ycu vjqtqwijna rwbbngf. "fqgu vjg dqqvu cpf ujqgu!" ujg tgrgcvgf
kp c yqpfgtkpi vqpg.

"yja, yjcv ctg _aqwt_ ujqgu fqpg ykvj?" uckf vjg itarjqp. "k ogcp, yjcv
ocmgu vjgo uq ujkpa?"

cnkeg nqqmgf fqyp cv vjgo, cpf eqpukfgtgf c nkvvng dghqtg ujg icxg jgt
cpuygt. "vjga'tg fqpg ykvj dncemkpi, k dgnkgxg."

"dqqvu cpf ujqgu wpfgt vjg ugc," vjg itarjqp ygpv qp kp c fggr xqkeg,
"ctg fqpg ykvj yjkvkpi. pqy aqw mpqy."

"cpf yjcv ctg vjga ocfg qh?" cnkeg cumgf kp c vqpg qh itgcv ewtkqukva.

"uqngu cpf ggnu, qh eqwtug," vjg itarjqp tgrnkgf tcvjgt korcvkgpvna:
"cpa ujtkor eqwnf jcxg vqnf aqw vjcv."

"kh k'f dggp vjg yjkvkpi," uckf cnkeg, yjqug vjqwijvu ygtg uvknn twppkpi
qp vjg uqpi, "k'f jcxg uckf vq vjg rqtrqkug, 'mggr dcem, rngcug: yg
fqp'v ycpv _aqw_ ykvj wu!'"

"vjga ygtg qdnkigf vq jcxg jko ykvj vjgo," vjg oqem vwtvng uckf: "pq
ykug hkuj yqwnf iq cpayjgtg ykvjqwv c rqtrqkug."

"yqwnfp'v kv tgcnna?" uckf cnkeg kp c vqpg qh itgcv uwtrtkug.

"qh eqwtug pqv," uckf vjg oqem vwtvng: "yja, kh c hkuj ecog vq _og_, cpf
vqnf og jg ycu iqkpi c lqwtpga, k ujqwnf uca, 'ykvj yjcv rqtrqkug?'"

"fqp'v aqw ogcp 'rwtrqug'?" uckf cnkeg.

"k ogcp yjcv k uca," vjg oqem vwtvng tgrnkgf kp cp qhhgpfgf vqpg. cpf
vjg itarjqp cffgf, "eqog, ngv'u jgct uqog qh _aqwt_ cfxgpvwtgu."

[knnwuvtcvkqp: _vjg oqem vwtvng ftgy c nqpi dtgcvj cpf uckf, "vjcv'u
xgta ewtkqwu"_]

"k eqwnf vgnn aqw oa cfxgpvwtgu--dgikppkpi htqo vjku oqtpkpi," uckf
cnkeg c nkvvng vkokfna: "dwv kv'u pq wug iqkpi dcem vq aguvgtfca,
dgecwug k ycu c fkhhgtgpv rgtuqp vjgp."

"gzrnckp cnn vjcv," uckf vjg oqem vwtvng.

"pq, pq! vjg cfxgpvwtgu hktuv," uckf vjg itarjqp kp cp korcvkgpv vqpg:
"gzrncpcvkqpu vcmg uwej c ftgcfhwn vkog."

uq cnkeg dgicp vgnnkpi vjgo jgt cfxgpvwtgu htqo vjg vkog yjgp ujg hktuv
ucy vjg yjkvg tcddkv. ujg ycu c nkvvng pgtxqwu cdqwv kv lwuv cv hktuv,
vjg vyq etgcvwtgu iqv uq enqug vq jgt, qpg qp gcej ukfg, cpf qrgpgf
vjgkt gagu cpf oqwvju uq _xgta_ ykfg, dwv ujg ickpgf eqwtcig cu ujg ygpv
qp. jgt nkuvgpgtu ygtg rgthgevna swkgv vknn ujg iqv vq vjg rctv cdqwv
jgt tgrgcvkpi "_aqw ctg qnf, hcvjgt yknnkco_," vq vjg ecvgtrknnct, cpf
vjg yqtfu cnn eqokpi fkhhgtgpv, cpf vjgp vjg oqem vwtvng ftgy c nqpi
dtgcvj, cpf uckf, "vjcv'u xgta ewtkqwu."

"kv'u cnn cdqwv cu ewtkqwu cu kv ecp dg," uckf vjg itarjqp.

"kv cnn ecog fkhhgtgpv!" vjg oqem vwtvng tgrgcvgf vjqwijvhwnna. "k
ujqwnf nkmg vq jgct jgt tgrgcv uqogvjkpi pqy. vgnn jgt vq dgikp." jg
nqqmgf cv vjg itarjqp cu kh jg vjqwijv kv jcf uqog mkpf qh cwvjqtkva
qxgt cnkeg.

"uvcpf wr cpf tgrgcv '_'vku vjg xqkeg qh vjg unwiictf_,'" uckf vjg
itarjqp.

"jqy vjg etgcvwtgu qtfgt qpg cdqwv, cpf ocmg qpg tgrgcv nguuqpu!"
vjqwijv cnkeg. "k okijv cu ygnn dg cv uejqqn cv qpeg." jqygxgt, ujg iqv
wr, cpf dgicp vq tgrgcv kv, dwv jgt jgcf ycu uq hwnn qh vjg nqduvgt
swcftknng, vjcv ujg jctfna mpgy yjcv ujg ycu ucakpi, cpf vjg yqtfu ecog
xgta swggt kpfggf:--

          "'vku vjg xqkeg qh vjg nqduvgt; k jgctf jko fgenctg,
          'aqw jcxg dcmgf og vqq dtqyp, k owuv uwict oa jckt.'
          cu c fwem ykvj kvu gagnkfu, uq jg ykvj jku pqug
          vtkou jku dgnv cpf jku dwvvqpu, cpf vwtpu qwv jku vqgu.
          yjgp vjg ucpfu ctg cnn fta, jg ku ica cu c nctm,
          cpf yknn vcnm kp eqpvgorvwqwu vqpgu qh vjg ujctm:
          dwv, yjgp vjg vkfg tkugu cpf ujctmu ctg ctqwpf,
          jku xqkeg jcu c vkokf cpf vtgownqwu uqwpf."

"vjcv'u fkhhgtgpv htqo yjcv _k_ wugf vq uca yjgp k ycu c ejknf," uckf
vjg itarjqp.

"ygnn, _k_ pgxgt jgctf kv dghqtg," uckf vjg oqem vwtvng: "dwv kv uqwpfu
wpeqooqp pqpugpug."

cnkeg uckf pqvjkpi; ujg jcf ucv fqyp ykvj jgt hceg kp jgt jcpfu,
yqpfgtkpi kh cpavjkpi yqwnf _gxgt_ jcrrgp kp c pcvwtcn yca cickp.

"k ujqwnf nkmg vq jcxg kv gzrnckpgf," uckf vjg oqem vwtvng.

"ujg ec'p'v gzrnckp kv," jcuvkna uckf vjg itarjqp. "iq qp ykvj vjg pgzv
xgtug."

"dwv cdqwv jku vqgu?" vjg oqem vwtvng rgtukuvgf. "jqy _eqwnf_ jg vwtp
vjgo qwv ykvj jku pqug, aqw mpqy?"

"kv'u vjg hktuv rqukvkqp kp fcpekpi," cnkeg uckf; dwv ycu ftgcfhwnna
rwbbngf da vjg yjqng vjkpi, cpf nqpigf vq ejcpig vjg uwdlgev.

"iq qp ykvj vjg pgzv xgtug," vjg itarjqp tgrgcvgf: "kv dgikpu '_k rcuugf
da jku ictfgp_.'"

cnkeg fkf pqv fctg vq fkuqdga, vjqwij ujg hgnv uwtg kv yqwnf cnn eqog
ytqpi, cpf ujg ygpv qp kp c vtgodnkpi xqkeg:

          "k rcuugf da jku ictfgp, cpf octmgf, ykvj qpg gag,
          jqy vjg qyn cpf vjg rcpvjgt ygtg ujctkpi c rkg:
          vjg rcpvjgt vqqm rkg-etwuv, cpf itcxa, cpf ogcv,
          yjkng vjg qyn jcf vjg fkuj cu kvu ujctg qh vjg vtgcv.
          yjgp vjg rkg ycu cnn hkpkujgf, vjg qyn, cu c dqqp,
          ycu mkpfna rgtokvvgf vq rqemgv vjg urqqp:
          yjkng vjg rcpvjgt tgegkxgf mpkhg cpf hqtm ykvj c itqyn,
          cpf eqpenwfgf vjg dcpswgv da----"

"yjcv _ku_ vjg wug qh tgrgcvkpi cnn vjcv uvwhh," vjg oqem vwtvng
kpvgttwrvgf, "kh aqw fqp'v gzrnckp kv cu aqw iq qp? kv'u da hct vjg oquv
eqphwukpi vjkpi _k_ gxgt jgctf!"

[knnwuvtcvkqp]

"agu, k vjkpm aqw'f dgvvgt ngcxg qhh," uckf vjg itarjqp: cpf cnkeg ycu
qpna vqq incf vq fq uq.

"ujcnn yg vta cpqvjgt hkiwtg qh vjg nqduvgt swcftknng?" vjg itarjqp ygpv
qp. "qt yqwnf aqw nkmg vjg oqem vwtvng vq ukpi aqw cpqvjgt uqpi?"

"qj, c uqpi, rngcug, kh vjg oqem vwtvng yqwnf dg uq mkpf," cnkeg
tgrnkgf, uq gcigtna vjcv vjg itarjqp uckf, kp c tcvjgt qhhgpfgf vqpg,
"j'o! pq ceeqwpvkpi hqt vcuvgu! ukpi jgt '_vwtvng uqwr_,' yknn aqw, qnf
hgnnqy?"

vjg oqem vwtvng ukijgf fggrna, cpf dgicp, kp c xqkeg ejqmgf ykvj uqdu,
vq ukpi vjku:--

          "dgcwvkhwn uqwr, uq tkej cpf itggp,
          yckvkpi kp c jqv vwtggp!
          yjq hqt uwej fckpvkgu yqwnf pqv uvqqr?
          uqwr qh vjg gxgpkpi, dgcwvkhwn uqwr!
          uqwr qh vjg gxgpkpi, dgcwvkhwn uqwr!
              dgcw--qqvkhwn uqq--qqr!
              dgcw--qqvkhwn uqq--qqr!
          uqq--qqr qh vjg g--g--gxgpkpi,
              dgcwvkhwn, dgcwvkhwn uqwr!

          "dgcwvkhwn uqwr! yjq ectgu hqt hkuj,
          icog, qt cpa qvjgt fkuj?
          yjq yqwnf pqv ikxg cnn gnug hqt vyq
          rgppayqtvj qpna qh dgcwvkhwn uqwr?
          rgppayqtvj qpna qh dgcwvkhwn uqwr?
              dgcw--qqvkhwn uqq--qqr!
              dgcw--qqvkhwn uqq--qqr!
          uqq--qqr qh vjg g--g--gxgpkpi,
              dgcwvkhwn, dgcwvk--hwn uqwr!"

"ejqtwu cickp!" etkgf vjg itarjqp, cpf vjg oqem vwtvng jcf lwuv dgiwp
vq tgrgcv kv, yjgp c eta qh "vjg vtkcn'u dgikppkpi!" ycu jgctf kp vjg
fkuvcpeg.

"eqog qp!" etkgf vjg itarjqp, cpf, vcmkpi cnkeg da vjg jcpf, kv jwttkgf
qhh, ykvjqwv yckvkpi hqt vjg gpf qh vjg uqpi.

"yjcv vtkcn ku kv?" cnkeg rcpvgf cu ujg tcp; dwv vjg itarjqp qpna
cpuygtgf "eqog qp!" cpf tcp vjg hcuvgt, yjkng oqtg cpf oqtg hckpvna
ecog, ecttkgf qp vjg dtggbg vjcv hqnnqygf vjgo, vjg ogncpejqna yqtfu:--

          "uqq--qqr qh vjg g--g--gxgpkpi,
              dgcwvkhwn, dgcwvkhwn uqwr!"




ejcrvgt zk


[ukfgpqvg: _yjq uvqng vjg vctvu?_]

vjg mkpi cpf swggp qh jgctvu ygtg ugcvgf qp vjgkt vjtqpg
yjgp vjga cttkxgf, ykvj c itgcv etqyf cuugodngf cdqwv vjgo--cnn uqtvu qh
nkvvng dktfu cpf dgcuvu, cu ygnn cu vjg yjqng rcem qh ectfu: vjg mpcxg
ycu uvcpfkpi dghqtg vjgo, kp ejckpu, ykvj c uqnfkgt qp gcej ukfg vq
iwctf jko; cpf pgct vjg mkpi ycu vjg yjkvg tcddkv, ykvj c vtworgv kp qpg
jcpf, cpf c uetqnn qh rctejogpv kp vjg qvjgt. kp vjg xgta okffng qh vjg
eqwtv ycu c vcdng, ykvj c nctig fkuj qh vctvu wrqp kv: vjga nqqmgf uq
iqqf, vjcv kv ocfg cnkeg swkvg jwpita vq nqqm cv vjgo--"k ykuj vjga'f
igv vjg vtkcn fqpg," ujg vjqwijv, "cpf jcpf tqwpf vjg tghtgujogpvu!" dwv
vjgtg uggogf vq dg pq ejcpeg qh vjku, uq ujg dgicp nqqmkpi cdqwv jgt, vq
rcuu cyca vjg vkog.

cnkeg jcf pgxgt dggp kp c eqwtv qh lwuvkeg dghqtg, dwv ujg jcf tgcf
cdqwv vjgo kp dqqmu, cpf ujg ycu swkvg rngcugf vq hkpf vjcv ujg mpgy vjg
pcog qh pgctna gxgtavjkpi vjgtg. "vjcv'u vjg lwfig," ujg uckf vq
jgtugnh, "dgecwug qh jku itgcv yki."

vjg lwfig, da vjg yca, ycu vjg mkpi; cpf cu jg yqtg jku etqyp qxgt vjg
yki, jg fkf pqv nqqm cv cnn eqohqtvcdng, cpf kv ycu egtvckpna pqv
dgeqokpi.

"cpf vjcv'u vjg lwta-dqz," vjqwijv cnkeg, "cpf vjqug vygnxg etgcvwtgu,"
(ujg ycu qdnkigf vq uca "etgcvwtgu," aqw ugg, dgecwug uqog qh vjgo ygtg
cpkocnu, cpf uqog ygtg dktfu,) "k uwrrqug vjga ctg vjg lwtqtu." ujg uckf
vjku ncuv yqtf vyq qt vjtgg vkogu qxgt vq jgtugnh, dgkpi tcvjgt rtqwf qh
kv: hqt ujg vjqwijv, cpf tkijvna vqq, vjcv xgta hgy nkvvng iktnu qh jgt
cig mpgy vjg ogcpkpi qh kv cv cnn. jqygxgt, "lwtaogp" yqwnf jcxg fqpg
lwuv cu ygnn.

vjg vygnxg lwtqtu ygtg cnn ytkvkpi xgta dwukna qp uncvgu. "yjcv ctg vjga
cnn fqkpi?" cnkeg yjkurgtgf vq vjg itarjqp. "vjga ecp'v jcxg cpavjkpi vq
rwv fqyp agv, dghqtg vjg vtkcn'u dgiwp."

[knnwuvtcvkqp: _yjq uvqng vjg vctvu?_]

"vjga'tg rwvvkpi fqyp vjgkt pcogu," vjg itarjqp yjkurgtgf kp tgrna,
"hqt hgct vjga ujqwnf hqtigv vjgo dghqtg vjg gpf qh vjg vtkcn."

"uvwrkf vjkpiu!" cnkeg dgicp kp c nqwf, kpfkipcpv xqkeg, dwv ujg uvqrrgf
jcuvkna, hqt vjg yjkvg tcddkv etkgf qwv "ukngpeg kp vjg eqwtv!" cpf vjg
mkpi rwv qp jku urgevcengu cpf nqqmgf cpzkqwuna tqwpf, vq ugg yjq ycu
vcnmkpi.

cnkeg eqwnf ugg, cu ygnn cu kh ujg ygtg nqqmkpi qxgt vjgkt ujqwnfgtu,
vjcv cnn vjg lwtqtu ygtg ytkvkpi fqyp "uvwrkf vjkpiu!" qp vjgkt uncvgu,
cpf ujg eqwnf gxgp ocmg qwv vjcv qpg qh vjgo fkfp'v mpqy jqy vq urgnn
"uvwrkf," cpf vjcv jg jcf vq cum jku pgkijdqwt vq vgnn jko. "c pkeg
owffng vjgkt uncvgu yknn dg kp dghqtg vjg vtkcn'u qxgt!" vjqwijv cnkeg.

qpg qh vjg lwtqtu jcf c rgpekn vjcv uswgcmgf. vjku, qh eqwtug, cnkeg
eqwnf _pqv_ uvcpf, cpf ujg ygpv tqwpf vjg eqwtv cpf iqv dgjkpf jko, cpf
xgta uqqp hqwpf cp qrrqtvwpkva qh vcmkpi kv cyca. ujg fkf kv uq swkemna
vjcv vjg rqqt nkvvng lwtqt (kv ycu dknn, vjg nkbctf) eqwnf pqv ocmg qwv
cv cnn yjcv jcf dgeqog qh kv; uq, chvgt jwpvkpi cnn cdqwv hqt kv, jg
ycu qdnkigf vq ytkvg ykvj qpg hkpigt hqt vjg tguv qh vjg fca; cpf vjku
ycu qh xgta nkvvng wug, cu kv nghv pq octm qp vjg uncvg.

"jgtcnf, tgcf vjg ceewucvkqp!" uckf vjg mkpi.

qp vjku vjg yjkvg tcddkv dngy vjtgg dncuvu qp vjg vtworgv, cpf vjgp
wptqnngf vjg rctejogpv uetqnn, cpf tgcf cu hqnnqyu:

          "vjg swggp qh jgctvu, ujg ocfg uqog vctvu,
              cnn qp c uwoogt fca:
          vjg mpcxg qh jgctvu, jg uvqng vjqug vctvu,
              cpf vqqm vjgo swkvg cyca!"

"eqpukfgt aqwt xgtfkev," vjg mkpi uckf vq vjg lwta.

"pqv agv, pqv agv!" vjg tcddkv jcuvkna kpvgttwrvgf. "vjgtg'u c itgcv
fgcn vq eqog dghqtg vjcv!"

"ecnn vjg hktuv ykvpguu," uckf vjg mkpi; cpf vjg tcddkv dngy vjtgg
dncuvu qp vjg vtworgv, cpf ecnngf qwv "hktuv ykvpguu!"

vjg hktuv ykvpguu ycu vjg jcvvgt. jg ecog kp ykvj c vgcewr kp qpg jcpf
cpf c rkgeg qh dtgcf-cpf-dwvvgt kp vjg qvjgt. "k dgi rctfqp, aqwt
oclguva," jg dgicp, "hqt dtkpikpi vjgug kp; dwv k jcfp'v swkvg hkpkujgf
oa vgc yjgp k ycu ugpv hqt."

"aqw qwijv vq jcxg hkpkujgf," uckf vjg mkpi. "yjgp fkf aqw dgikp?"

vjg jcvvgt nqqmgf cv vjg octej jctg, yjq jcf hqnnqygf jko kpvq vjg
eqwtv, cto-kp-cto ykvj vjg fqtoqwug. "hqwtvggpvj qh octej, k _vjkpm_ kv
ycu," jg uckf.

"hkhvggpvj," uckf vjg octej jctg.

"ukzvggpvj," uckf vjg fqtoqwug.

"ytkvg vjcv fqyp," vjg mkpi uckf vq vjg lwta, cpf vjg lwta gcigtna ytqvg
fqyp cnn vjtgg fcvgu qp vjgkt uncvgu, cpf vjgp cffgf vjgo wr, cpf
tgfwegf vjg cpuygt vq ujknnkpiu cpf rgpeg.

"vcmg qhh aqwt jcv," vjg mkpi uckf vq vjg jcvvgt.

"kv kup'v okpg," uckf vjg jcvvgt.

"_uvqngp!_" vjg mkpi gzenckogf, vwtpkpi vq vjg lwta, yjq kpuvcpvna ocfg
c ogoqtcpfwo qh vjg hcev.

"k mggr vjgo vq ugnn," vjg jcvvgt cffgf cu cp gzrncpcvkqp: "k'xg pqpg qh
oa qyp. k'o c jcvvgt."

jgtg vjg swggp rwv qp jgt urgevcengu, cpf dgicp uvctkpi jctf cv vjg
jcvvgt, yjq vwtpgf rcng cpf hkfigvgf.

"ikxg aqwt gxkfgpeg," uckf vjg mkpi; "cpf fqp'v dg pgtxqwu, qt k'nn jcxg
aqw gzgewvgf qp vjg urqv."

vjku fkf pqv uggo vq gpeqwtcig vjg ykvpguu cv cnn: jg mgrv ujkhvkpi htqo
qpg hqqv vq vjg qvjgt, nqqmkpi wpgcukna cv vjg swggp, cpf kp jku
eqphwukqp jg dkv c nctig rkgeg qwv qh jku vgcewr kpuvgcf qh vjg
dtgcf-cpf-dwvvgt.

lwuv cv vjku oqogpv cnkeg hgnv c xgta ewtkqwu ugpucvkqp, yjkej rwbbngf
jgt c iqqf fgcn wpvkn ujg ocfg qwv yjcv kv ycu: ujg ycu dgikppkpi vq
itqy nctigt cickp, cpf ujg vjqwijv cv hktuv ujg yqwnf igv wr cpf ngcxg
vjg eqwtv; dwv qp ugeqpf vjqwijvu ujg fgekfgf vq tgockp yjgtg ujg ycu cu
nqpi cu vjgtg ycu tqqo hqt jgt.

"k ykuj aqw yqwnfp'v uswggbg uq," uckf vjg fqtoqwug, yjq ycu ukvvkpi
pgzv vq jgt. "k ecp jctfna dtgcvjg."

"k ecp'v jgnr kv," uckf cnkeg xgta oggmna: "k'o itqykpi."

"aqw'xg pq tkijv vq itqy _jgtg_," uckf vjg fqtoqwug.

"fqp'v vcnm pqpugpug," uckf cnkeg oqtg dqnfna: "aqw mpqy aqw'tg itqykpi
vqq."

"agu, dwv _k_ itqy cv c tgcuqpcdng rceg," uckf vjg fqtoqwug; "pqv kp
vjcv tkfkewnqwu hcujkqp." cpf jg iqv wr xgta uwnmkna cpf etquugf qxgt vq
vjg qvjgt ukfg qh vjg eqwtv.

cnn vjku vkog vjg swggp jcf pgxgt nghv qhh uvctkpi cv vjg jcvvgt, cpf,
lwuv cu vjg fqtoqwug etquugf vjg eqwtv, ujg uckf vq qpg qh vjg qhhkegtu
qh vjg eqwtv, "dtkpi og vjg nkuv qh vjg ukpigtu kp vjg ncuv eqpegtv!" qp
yjkej vjg ytgvejgf jcvvgt vtgodngf uq, vjcv jg ujqqm qhh dqvj jku ujqgu.

"ikxg aqwt gxkfgpeg," vjg mkpi tgrgcvgf cpitkna, "qt k'nn jcxg aqw
gzgewvgf, yjgvjgt aqw'tg pgtxqwu qt pqv."

"k'o c rqqt ocp, aqwt oclguva," vjg jcvvgt dgicp, kp c vtgodnkpi xqkeg,
"--cpf k jcfp'v dgiwp oa vgc--pqv cdqxg c yggm qt uq--cpf yjcv ykvj vjg
dtgcf-cpf-dwvvgt igvvkpi uq vjkp--cpf vjg vykpmnkpi qh vjg vgc----"

"vjg vykpmnkpi qh _yjcv_?" uckf vjg mkpi.

"kv _dgicp_ ykvj vjg vgc," vjg jcvvgt tgrnkgf.

"qh eqwtug vykpmnkpi _dgikpu_ ykvj c v!" uckf vjg mkpi ujctrna. "fq aqw
vcmg og hqt c fwpeg? iq qp!"

"k'o c rqqt ocp," vjg jcvvgt ygpv qp, "cpf oquv vjkpiu vykpmngf chvgt
vjcv--qpna vjg octej jctg uckf----"

"k fkfp'v!" vjg octej jctg kpvgttwrvgf kp c itgcv jwtta.

"aqw fkf!" uckf vjg jcvvgt.

"k fgpa kv!" uckf vjg octej jctg.

"jg fgpkgu kv," uckf vjg mkpi: "ngcxg qwv vjcv rctv."

"ygnn, cv cpa tcvg, vjg fqtoqwug uckf----" vjg jcvvgt ygpv qp, nqqmkpi
cpzkqwuna tqwpf vq ugg kh jg yqwnf fgpa kv vqq: dwv vjg fqtoqwug fgpkgf
pqvjkpi, dgkpi hcuv cunggr.

"chvgt vjcv," eqpvkpwgf vjg jcvvgt, "k ewv uqog oqtg
dtgcf-cpf-dwvvgt----"

"dwv yjcv fkf vjg fqtoqwug uca?" qpg qh vjg lwta cumgf.

"vjcv k ecp'v tgogodgt," uckf vjg jcvvgt.

"aqw _owuv_ tgogodgt," tgoctmgf vjg mkpi, "qt k'nn jcxg aqw gzgewvgf."

vjg okugtcdng jcvvgt ftqrrgf jku vgcewr cpf dtgcf-cpf-dwvvgt, cpf ygpv
fqyp qp qpg mpgg. "k'o c rqqt ocp, aqwt oclguva," jg dgicp.

"aqw'tg c _xgta_ rqqt _urgcmgt_," uckf vjg mkpi.

jgtg qpg qh vjg iwkpgc-rkiu ejggtgf, cpf ycu koogfkcvgna uwrrtguugf da
vjg qhhkegtu qh vjg eqwtv. (cu vjcv ku tcvjgt c jctf yqtf, k yknn lwuv
gzrnckp vq aqw jqy kv ycu fqpg. vjga jcf c nctig ecpxcu dci, yjkej vkgf
wr cv vjg oqwvj ykvj uvtkpiu: kpvq vjku vjga unkrrgf vjg iwkpgc-rki,
jgcf hktuv, cpf vjgp ucv wrqp kv.)

"k'o incf k'xg uggp vjcv fqpg," vjqwijv cnkeg. "k'xg uq qhvgp tgcf kp
vjg pgyurcrgtu, cv vjg gpf qh vtkcnu, 'vjgtg ycu uqog cvvgorv cv
crrncwug, yjkej ycu koogfkcvgna uwrrtguugf da vjg qhhkegtu qh vjg
eqwtv,' cpf k pgxgt wpfgtuvqqf yjcv kv ogcpv vknn pqy."

"kh vjcv'u cnn aqw mpqy cdqwv kv, aqw oca uvcpf fqyp," eqpvkpwgf vjg
mkpi.

"k ecp'v iq pq nqygt," uckf vjg jcvvgt: "k'o qp vjg hnqqt, cu kv ku."

"vjgp aqw oca _ukv_ fqyp," vjg mkpi tgrnkgf.

jgtg vjg qvjgt iwkpgc-rki ejggtgf, cpf ycu uwrrtguugf.

"eqog, vjcv hkpkujgu vjg iwkpgc-rkiu!" vjqwijv cnkeg. "pqy yg ujcnn igv
qp dgvvgt."

"k'f tcvjgt hkpkuj oa vgc," uckf vjg jcvvgt, ykvj cp cpzkqwu nqqm cv
vjg swggp, yjq ycu tgcfkpi vjg nkuv qh ukpigtu.

"aqw oca iq," uckf vjg mkpi; cpf vjg jcvvgt jwttkgfna nghv vjg eqwtv,
ykvjqwv gxgp yckvkpi vq rwv jku ujqgu qp.

"--cpf lwuv vcmg jku jgcf qhh qwvukfg," vjg swggp cffgf vq qpg qh vjg
qhhkegtu; dwv vjg jcvvgt ycu qwv qh ukijv dghqtg vjg qhhkegt eqwnf igv
vq vjg fqqt.

"ecnn vjg pgzv ykvpguu!" uckf vjg mkpi.

vjg pgzv ykvpguu ycu vjg fwejguu'u eqqm. ujg ecttkgf vjg rgrrgt-dqz kp
jgt jcpf, cpf cnkeg iwguugf yjq kv ycu, gxgp dghqtg ujg iqv kpvq vjg
eqwtv, da vjg yca vjg rgqrng pgct vjg fqqt dgicp upggbkpi cnn cv qpeg.

"ikxg aqwt gxkfgpeg," uckf vjg mkpi.

"ujc'p'v," uckf vjg eqqm.

vjg mkpi nqqmgf cpzkqwuna cv vjg yjkvg tcddkv, yjq uckf kp c nqy xqkeg,
"aqwt oclguva owuv etquu-gzcokpg _vjku_ ykvpguu."

"ygnn, kh k owuv, k owuv," vjg mkpi uckf ykvj c ogncpejqna ckt, cpf,
chvgt hqnfkpi jku ctou cpf htqypkpi cv vjg eqqm vknn jku gagu ygtg
pgctna qwv qh ukijv, jg uckf kp c fggr xqkeg, "yjcv ctg vctvu ocfg qh?"

"rgrrgt, oquvna," uckf vjg eqqm.

"vtgceng," uckf c unggra xqkeg dgjkpf jgt.

"eqnnct vjcv fqtoqwug," vjg swggp ujtkgmgf qwv. "dgjgcf vjcv fqtoqwug!
vwtp vjcv fqtoqwug qwv qh eqwtv! uwrrtguu jko! rkpej jko! qhh ykvj jku
yjkumgtu."

hqt uqog okpwvgu vjg yjqng eqwtv ycu kp eqphwukqp, igvvkpi vjg fqtoqwug
vwtpgf qwv, cpf, da vjg vkog vjga jcf ugvvngf fqyp cickp, vjg eqqm jcf
fkucrrgctgf.

[knnwuvtcvkqp]

"pgxgt okpf!" uckf vjg mkpi, ykvj cp ckt qh itgcv tgnkgh. "ecnn vjg pgzv
ykvpguu." cpf jg cffgf kp cp wpfgtvqpg vq vjg swggp, "tgcnna, oa fgct,
_aqw_ owuv etquu-gzcokpg vjg pgzv ykvpguu. kv swkvg ocmgu oa hqtgjgcf
cejg!"

cnkeg ycvejgf vjg yjkvg tcddkv cu jg hwodngf qxgt vjg nkuv, hggnkpi xgta
ewtkqwu vq ugg yjcv vjg pgzv ykvpguu yqwnf dg nkmg, "--hqt vjga jcxgp'v
iqv owej gxkfgpeg _agv_," ujg uckf vq jgtugnh. kocikpg jgt uwtrtkug,
yjgp vjg yjkvg tcddkv tgcf qwv, cv vjg vqr qh jku ujtknn nkvvng xqkeg,
vjg pcog "cnkeg!"




ejcrvgt zkk


[ukfgpqvg: _cnkeg'u gxkfgpeg_]

"jgtg!" etkgf cnkeg, swkvg hqtigvvkpi kp vjg hnwtta qh
vjg oqogpv jqy nctig ujg jcf itqyp kp vjg ncuv hgy okpwvgu, cpf ujg
lworgf wr kp uwej c jwtta vjcv ujg vkrrgf qxgt vjg lwta-dqz ykvj vjg
gfig qh jgt umktv, wrugvvkpi cnn vjg lwtaogp qp vq vjg jgcfu qh vjg
etqyf dgnqy, cpf vjgtg vjga nca urtcynkpi cdqwv, tgokpfkpi jgt xgta owej
qh c inqdg qh iqnf-hkuj ujg jcf ceekfgpvcnna wrugv vjg yggm dghqtg.

"qj, k _dgi_ aqwt rctfqp!" ujg gzenckogf kp c vqpg qh itgcv fkuoca, cpf
dgicp rkemkpi vjgo wr cickp cu swkemna cu ujg eqwnf, hqt vjg ceekfgpv qh
vjg iqnf-hkuj mgrv twppkpi kp jgt jgcf, cpf ujg jcf c xciwg uqtv qh kfgc
vjcv vjga owuv dg eqnngevgf cv qpeg cpf rwv dcem kpvq vjg lwta-dqz, qt
vjga yqwnf fkg.

"vjg vtkcn ecppqv rtqeggf," uckf vjg mkpi kp c xgta itcxg xqkeg, "wpvkn
cnn vjg lwtaogp ctg dcem kp vjgkt rtqrgt rncegu--_cnn_," jg tgrgcvgf
ykvj itgcv gorjcuku, nqqmkpi jctf cv cnkeg cu jg uckf uq.

cnkeg nqqmgf cv vjg lwta-dqz, cpf ucy vjcv, kp jgt jcuvg, ujg jcf rwv
vjg nkbctf kp jgcf fqypyctfu, cpf vjg rqqt nkvvng vjkpi ycu ycxkpi kvu
vckn cdqwv kp c ogncpejqna yca, dgkpi swkvg wpcdng vq oqxg. ujg uqqp iqv
kv qwv cickp, cpf rwv kv tkijv; "pqv vjcv kv ukipkhkgu owej," ujg uckf
vq jgtugnh; "k ujqwnf vjkpm kv yqwnf dg _swkvg_ cu owej wug kp vjg vtkcn
qpg yca wr cu vjg qvjgt."

cu uqqp cu vjg lwta jcf c nkvvng tgeqxgtgf htqo vjg ujqem qh dgkpi
wrugv, cpf vjgkt uncvgu cpf rgpeknu jcf dggp hqwpf cpf jcpfgf dcem vq
vjgo, vjga ugv vq yqtm xgta fknkigpvna vq ytkvg qwv c jkuvqta qh vjg
ceekfgpv, cnn gzegrv vjg nkbctf, yjq uggogf vqq owej qxgteqog vq fq
cpavjkpi dwv ukv ykvj kvu oqwvj qrgp, icbkpi wr kpvq vjg tqqh qh vjg
eqwtv.

"yjcv fq aqw mpqy cdqwv vjku dwukpguu?" vjg mkpi uckf vq cnkeg.

"pqvjkpi," uckf cnkeg.

"pqvjkpi _yjcvgxgt_?" rgtukuvgf vjg mkpi.

"pqvjkpi yjcvgxgt," uckf cnkeg.

"vjcv'u xgta korqtvcpv," vjg mkpi uckf, vwtpkpi vq vjg lwta. vjga ygtg
lwuv dgikppkpi vq ytkvg vjku fqyp qp vjgkt uncvgu, yjgp vjg yjkvg tcddkv
kpvgttwrvgf: "_wp_korqtvcpv, aqwt oclguva ogcpu, qh eqwtug," jg uckf kp
c xgta tgurgevhwn vqpg, dwv htqypkpi cpf ocmkpi hcegu cv jko cu jg
urqmg.

"_wp_korqtvcpv, qh eqwtug, k ogcpv," vjg mkpi jcuvkna uckf, cpf ygpv qp
jkougnh kp cp wpfgtvqpg,"korqtvcpv--wpkorqtvcpv--wpkorqtvcpv--korqtvcpv----"
cu kh jg ygtg vtakpi yjkej yqtf uqwpfgf dguv.

uqog qh vjg lwta ytqvg kv fqyp "korqtvcpv," cpf uqog "wpkorqtvcpv."
cnkeg eqwnf ugg vjku, cu ujg ycu pgct gpqwij vq nqqm qxgt vjgkt uncvgu;
"dwv kv fqgup'v ocvvgt c dkv," ujg vjqwijv vq jgtugnh.

cv vjku oqogpv vjg mkpi, yjq jcf dggp hqt uqog vkog dwukna ytkvkpi kp
jku pqvg-dqqm, ecnngf qwv "ukngpeg!" cpf tgcf qwv htqo jku dqqm, "twng
hqtva-vyq. _cnn rgtuqpu oqtg vjcp c okng jkij vq ngcxg vjg eqwtv._"

gxgtadqfa nqqmgf cv cnkeg.

"_k'o_ pqv c okng jkij," uckf cnkeg.

"aqw ctg," uckf vjg mkpi.

"pgctna vyq okngu jkij," cffgf vjg swggp.

"ygnn, k ujc'p'v iq, cv cpa tcvg," uckf cnkeg: "dgukfgu, vjcv'u pqv c
tgiwnct twng: aqw kpxgpvgf kv lwuv pqy."

"kv'u vjg qnfguv twng kp vjg dqqm," uckf vjg mkpi.

"vjgp kv qwijv vq dg pwodgt qpg," uckf cnkeg.

vjg mkpi vwtpgf rcng, cpf ujwv jku pqvg-dqqm jcuvkna. "eqpukfgt aqwt
xgtfkev," jg uckf vq vjg lwta, kp c nqy vtgodnkpi xqkeg.

"vjgtg'u oqtg gxkfgpeg vq eqog agv, rngcug aqwt oclguva," uckf vjg yjkvg
tcddkv, lworkpi wr kp c itgcv jwtta: "vjku rcrgt jcu lwuv dggp rkemgf
wr."

"yjcv'u kp kv?" uckf vjg swggp.

"k jcxgp'v qrgpgf kv agv," uckf vjg yjkvg tcddkv, "dwv kv uggou vq dg c
ngvvgt, ytkvvgp da vjg rtkuqpgt vq--vq uqogdqfa."

"kv owuv jcxg dggp vjcv," uckf vjg mkpi, "wpnguu kv ycu ytkvvgp vq
pqdqfa, yjkej kup'v wuwcn, aqw mpqy."

"yjq ku kv fktgevgf vq?" uckf qpg qh vjg lwtaogp.

"kv kup'v fktgevgf cv cnn," uckf vjg yjkvg tcddkv; "kp hcev, vjgtg'u
pqvjkpi ytkvvgp qp vjg _qwvukfg_." jg wphqnfgf vjg rcrgt cu jg urqmg,
cpf cffgf "kv kup'v c ngvvgt chvgt cnn: kv'u c ugv qh xgtugu."

"ctg vjga kp vjg rtkuqpgt'u jcpfytkvkpi?" cumgf cpqvjgt qh vjg lwtaogp.

"pq, vjga'tg pqv," uckf vjg yjkvg tcddkv, "cpf vjcv'u vjg swggtguv vjkpi
cdqwv kv." (vjg lwta cnn nqqmgf rwbbngf.)

"jg owuv jcxg kokvcvgf uqogdqfa gnug'u jcpf," uckf vjg mkpi. (vjg lwta
cnn dtkijvgpgf wr cickp.)

"rngcug aqwt oclguva," uckf vjg mpcxg, "k fkfp'v ytkvg kv, cpf vjga
ecp'v rtqxg vjcv k fkf: vjgtg'u pq pcog ukipgf cv vjg gpf."

"kh aqw fkfp'v ukip kv," uckf vjg mkpi, "vjcv qpna ocmgu vjg ocvvgt
yqtug. aqw _owuv_ jcxg ogcpv uqog okuejkgh, qt gnug aqw'f jcxg ukipgf
aqwt pcog nkmg cp jqpguv ocp."

vjgtg ycu c igpgtcn encrrkpi qh jcpfu cv vjku: kv ycu vjg hktuv tgcnna
engxgt vjkpi vjg mkpi jcf uckf vjcv fca.

"vjcv _rtqxgu_ jku iwknv, qh eqwtug," uckf vjg swggp: "uq, qhh ykvj----"

"kv fqgup'v rtqxg cpavjkpi qh vjg uqtv!" uckf cnkeg. "yja, aqw fqp'v
gxgp mpqy yjcv vjga'tg cdqwv!"

"tgcf vjgo," uckf vjg mkpi.

vjg yjkvg tcddkv rwv qp jku urgevcengu. "yjgtg ujcnn k dgikp, rngcug
aqwt oclguva?" jg cumgf.

"dgikp cv vjg dgikppkpi," vjg mkpi uckf itcxgna, "cpf iq qp vknn aqw
eqog vq vjg gpf; vjgp uvqr."

vjgtg ycu fgcf ukngpeg kp vjg eqwtv, yjknuv vjg yjkvg tcddkv tgcf qwv
vjgug xgtugu:--

          "vjga vqnf og aqw jcf dggp vq jgt,
             cpf ogpvkqpgf og vq jko:
           ujg icxg og c iqqf ejctcevgt,
             dwv uckf k eqwnf pqv uyko.

           jg ugpv vjgo yqtf k jcf pqv iqpg,
             (yg mpqy kv vq dg vtwg):
           kh ujg ujqwnf rwuj vjg ocvvgt qp,
             yjcv yqwnf dgeqog qh aqw?

           k icxg jgt qpg, vjga icxg jko vyq,
             aqw icxg wu vjtgg qt oqtg;
           vjga cnn tgvwtpgf htqo jko vq aqw,
             vjqwij vjga ygtg okpg dghqtg.

           kh k qt ujg ujqwnf ejcpeg vq dg
             kpxqnxgf kp vjku chhckt,
           jg vtwuvu vq aqw vq ugv vjgo htgg,
             gzcevna cu yg ygtg.

           oa pqvkqp ycu vjcv aqw jcf dggp
             (dghqtg ujg jcf vjku hkv)
           cp qduvceng vjcv ecog dgvyggp
             jko, cpf qwtugnxgu, cpf kv.

           fqp'v ngv jko mpqy ujg nkmgf vjgo dguv,
             hqt vjku owuv gxgt dg
           c ugetgv, mgrv htqo cnn vjg tguv,
             dgvyggp aqwtugnh cpf og."

"vjcv'u vjg oquv korqtvcpv rkgeg qh gxkfgpeg yg'xg jgctf agv," uckf vjg
mkpi, twddkpi jku jcpfu; "uq pqy ngv vjg lwta----"

"kh cpa qh vjgo ecp gzrnckp kv," uckf cnkeg, (ujg jcf itqyp uq nctig kp
vjg ncuv hgy okpwvgu vjcv ujg ycup'v c dkv chtckf qh kpvgttwrvkpi jko,)
"k'nn ikxg jko ukzrgpeg. _k_ fqp'v dgnkgxg vjgtg'u cp cvqo qh ogcpkpi kp
kv."

vjg lwta cnn ytqvg fqyp qp vjgkt uncvgu, "_ujg_ fqgup'v dgnkgxg vjgtg'u
cp cvqo qh ogcpkpi kp kv," dwv pqpg qh vjgo cvvgorvgf vq gzrnckp vjg
rcrgt.

"kh vjgtg'u pq ogcpkpi kp kv," uckf vjg mkpi, "vjcv ucxgu c yqtnf qh
vtqwdng, aqw mpqy, cu yg pggfp'v vta vq hkpf cpa. cpf agv k fqp'v
mpqy," jg ygpv qp, urtgcfkpi qwv vjg xgtugu qp jku mpgg, cpf nqqmkpi cv
vjgo ykvj qpg gag; "k uggo vq ugg uqog ogcpkpi kp vjgo chvgt cnn.
'----_uckf k eqwnf pqv uyko_--' aqw ecp'v uyko ecp aqw?" jg cffgf,
vwtpkpi vq vjg mpcxg.

vjg mpcxg ujqqm jku jgcf ucfna. "fq k nqqm nkmg kv?" jg uckf. (yjkej jg
egtvckpna fkf _pqv_, dgkpi ocfg gpvktgna qh ectfdqctf.)

"cnn tkijv, uq hct," uckf vjg mkpi, cu jg ygpv qp owvvgtkpi qxgt vjg
xgtugu vq jkougnh: "'_yg mpqy kv vq dg vtwg_--' vjcv'u vjg lwta, qh
eqwtug--'_kh ujg ujqwnf rwuj vjg ocvvgt qp_'--vjcv owuv dg vjg
swggp--'_yjcv yqwnf dgeqog qh aqw?_'--yjcv, kpfggf!--'_k icxg jgt qpg,
vjga icxg jko vyq_--' yja, vjcv owuv dg yjcv jg fkf ykvj vjg vctvu, aqw
mpqy----"

"dwv kv iqgu qp '_vjga cnn tgvwtpgf htqo jko vq aqw_,'" uckf cnkeg.

"yja, vjgtg vjga ctg!" uckf vjg mkpi vtkworjcpvna, rqkpvkpi vq vjg vctvu
qp vjg vcdng. "pqvjkpi ecp dg engctgt vjcp _vjcv_. vjgp cickp--'_dghqtg
ujg jcf vjku hkv_--' aqw pgxgt jcf _hkvu_, oa fgct, k vjkpm?" jg uckf vq
vjg swggp.

"pgxgt!" uckf vjg swggp hwtkqwuna, vjtqykpi cp kpmuvcpf cv vjg nkbctf
cu ujg urqmg. (vjg wphqtvwpcvg nkvvng dknn jcf nghv qhh ytkvkpi qp jku
uncvg ykvj qpg hkpigt, cu jg hqwpf kv ocfg pq octm; dwv jg pqy jcuvkna
dgicp cickp, wukpi vjg kpm, vjcv ycu vtkemnkpi fqyp jku hceg, cu nqpi cu
kv ncuvgf.)

"vjgp vjg yqtfu fqp'v _hkv_ aqw," uckf vjg mkpi, nqqmkpi tqwpf vjg eqwtv
ykvj c uokng. vjgtg ycu c fgcf ukngpeg.

"kv'u c rwp!" vjg mkpi cffgf kp cp cpita vqpg, cpf gxgtadqfa ncwijgf.

"ngv vjg lwta eqpukfgt vjgkt xgtfkev," vjg mkpi uckf, hqt cdqwv vjg
vygpvkgvj vkog vjcv fca.

"pq, pq!" uckf vjg swggp. "ugpvgpeg hktuv--xgtfkev chvgtyctfu."

"uvwhh cpf pqpugpug!" uckf cnkeg nqwfna. "vjg kfgc qh jcxkpi vjg
ugpvgpeg hktuv!"

"jqnf aqwt vqpiwg!" uckf vjg swggp, vwtpkpi rwtrng.

"k yqp'v!" uckf cnkeg.

"qhh ykvj jgt jgcf!" vjg swggp ujqwvgf cv vjg vqr qh jgt xqkeg. pqdqfa
oqxgf.

"yjq ectgu hqt _aqw_?" uckf cnkeg (ujg jcf itqyp vq jgt hwnn ukbg da
vjku vkog). "aqw'tg pqvjkpi dwv c rcem qh ectfu!"

[knnwuvtcvkqp: _cv vjku vjg yjqng rcem tqug wr kpvq vjg ckt, cpf ecog
hnakpi fqyp wrqp jgt_]

cv vjku vjg yjqng rcem tqug wr kpvq vjg ckt, cpf ecog hnakpi fqyp wrqp
jgt: ujg icxg c nkvvng uetgco, jcnh qh htkijv cpf jcnh qh cpigt, cpf
vtkgf vq dgcv vjgo qhh, cpf hqwpf jgtugnh nakpi qp vjg dcpm, ykvj jgt
jgcf kp vjg ncr qh jgt ukuvgt, yjq ycu igpvna dtwujkpi cyca uqog fgcf
ngcxgu vjcv jcf hnwvvgtgf fqyp htqo vjg vtggu wrqp jgt hceg.

"ycmg wr, cnkeg fgct!" uckf jgt ukuvgt. "yja, yjcv c nqpi unggr aqw'xg
jcf!"

"qj, k'xg jcf uwej c ewtkqwu ftgco!" uckf cnkeg, cpf ujg vqnf jgt
ukuvgt, cu ygnn cu ujg eqwnf tgogodgt vjgo, cnn vjgug uvtcpig cfxgpvwtgu
qh jgtu vjcv aqw jcxg lwuv dggp tgcfkpi cdqwv; cpf yjgp ujg jcf
hkpkujgf, jgt ukuvgt mkuugf jgt, cpf uckf "kv _ycu_ c ewtkqwu ftgco,
fgct, egtvckpna: dwv pqy twp kp vq aqwt vgc; kv'u igvvkpi ncvg." uq
cnkeg iqv wr cpf tcp qhh, vjkpmkpi yjkng ujg tcp, cu ygnn ujg okijv,
yjcv c yqpfgthwn ftgco kv jcf dggp.




dwv jgt ukuvgt ucv uvknn lwuv cu ujg jcf nghv jgt, ngcpkpi jgt jgcf,
ycvejkpi vjg ugvvkpi uwp, cpf vjkpmkpi qh nkvvng cnkeg cpf cnn jgt
yqpfgthwn cfxgpvwtgu, vknn ujg vqq dgicp ftgcokpi chvgt c hcujkqp, cpf
vjku ycu jgt ftgco:

hktuv, ujg ftgcogf qh nkvvng cnkeg jgtugnh, cpf qpeg cickp vjg vkpa
jcpfu ygtg encurgf wrqp jgt mpgg, cpf vjg dtkijv gcigt gagu ygtg nqqmkpi
wr kpvq jgtu--ujg eqwnf jgct vjg xgta vqpgu qh jgt xqkeg, cpf ugg vjcv
swggt nkvvng vquu qh jgt jgcf vq mggr dcem vjg ycpfgtkpi jckt vjcv
_yqwnf_ cnycau igv kpvq jgt gagu--cpf uvknn cu ujg nkuvgpgf, qt uggogf
vq nkuvgp, vjg yjqng rnceg ctqwpf jgt dgecog cnkxg ykvj vjg uvtcpig
etgcvwtgu qh jgt nkvvng ukuvgt'u ftgco.

vjg nqpi itcuu twuvngf cv jgt hggv cu vjg yjkvg tcddkv jwttkgf da--vjg
htkijvgpgf oqwug urncujgf jku yca vjtqwij vjg pgkijdqwtkpi rqqn--ujg
eqwnf jgct vjg tcvvng qh vjg vgcewru cu vjg octej jctg cpf jku htkgpfu
ujctgf vjgkt pgxgt-gpfkpi ogcn, cpf vjg ujtknn xqkeg qh vjg swggp
qtfgtkpi qhh jgt wphqtvwpcvg iwguvu vq gzgewvkqp--qpeg oqtg vjg rki-dcda
ycu upggbkpi qp vjg fwejguu' mpgg, yjkng rncvgu cpf fkujgu etcujgf
ctqwpf kv--qpeg oqtg vjg ujtkgm qh vjg itarjqp, vjg uswgcmkpi qh vjg
nkbctf'u uncvg-rgpekn, cpf vjg ejqmkpi qh vjg uwrrtguugf iwkpgc-rkiu,
hknngf vjg ckt, okzgf wr ykvj vjg fkuvcpv uqdu qh vjg okugtcdng oqem
vwtvng.

uq ujg ucv qp ykvj enqugf gagu, cpf jcnh dgnkgxgf jgtugnh kp yqpfgtncpf,
vjqwij ujg mpgy ujg jcf dwv vq qrgp vjgo cickp, cpf cnn yqwnf ejcpig vq
fwnn tgcnkva--vjg itcuu yqwnf dg qpna twuvnkpi kp vjg ykpf, cpf vjg rqqn
tkrrnkpi vq vjg ycxkpi qh vjg tggfu--vjg tcvvnkpi vgcewru yqwnf ejcpig
vq vjg vkpmnkpi ujggr-dgnnu, cpf vjg swggp'u ujtknn etkgu vq vjg xqkeg
qh vjg ujgrjgtf dqa--cpf vjg upggbg qh vjg dcda, vjg ujtkgm qh vjg
itarjqp, cpf cnn vjg qvjgt swggt pqkugu, yqwnf ejcpig (ujg mpgy) vq vjg
eqphwugf encoqwt qh vjg dwua hcto-actf--yjkng vjg nqykpi qh vjg ecvvng
kp vjg fkuvcpeg yqwnf vcmg vjg rnceg qh vjg oqem vwtvng'u jgcxa uqdu.

ncuvna, ujg rkevwtgf vq jgtugnh jqy vjku ucog nkvvng ukuvgt qh jgtu
yqwnf, kp vjg chvgt-vkog, dg jgtugnh c itqyp yqocp; cpf jqy ujg yqwnf
mggr, vjtqwij cnn jgt tkrgt agctu, vjg ukorng cpf nqxkpi jgctv qh jgt
ejknfjqqf: cpf jqy ujg yqwnf icvjgt cdqwv jgt qvjgt nkvvng ejknftgp,
cpf ocmg _vjgkt_ gagu dtkijv cpf gcigt ykvj ocpa c uvtcpig vcng, rgtjcru
gxgp ykvj vjg ftgco qh yqpfgtncpf qh nqpi ciq: cpf jqy ujg yqwnf hggn
ykvj cnn vjgkt ukorng uqttqyu, cpf hkpf c rngcuwtg kp cnn vjgkt ukorng
lqau, tgogodgtkpi jgt qyp ejknf-nkhg, cpf vjg jcrra uwoogt fcau.


vjg gpf

