ejcrvgt 1. nqqokpiu.

ecnn og kujocgn. uqog agctu ciq—pgxgt okpf jqy nqpi rtgekugna—jcxkpi
nkvvng qt pq oqpga kp oa rwtug, cpf pqvjkpi rctvkewnct vq kpvgtguv og
qp ujqtg, k vjqwijv k yqwnf uckn cdqwv c nkvvng cpf ugg vjg ycvgta rctv
qh vjg yqtnf. kv ku c yca k jcxg qh ftkxkpi qhh vjg urnggp cpf
tgiwncvkpi vjg ektewncvkqp. yjgpgxgt k hkpf oaugnh itqykpi itko cdqwv
vjg oqwvj; yjgpgxgt kv ku c fcor, ftkbbna pqxgodgt kp oa uqwn; yjgpgxgt
k hkpf oaugnh kpxqnwpvctkna rcwukpi dghqtg eqhhkp yctgjqwugu, cpf
dtkpikpi wr vjg tgct qh gxgta hwpgtcn k oggv; cpf gurgekcnna yjgpgxgt
oa jarqu igv uwej cp wrrgt jcpf qh og, vjcv kv tgswktgu c uvtqpi oqtcn
rtkpekrng vq rtgxgpv og htqo fgnkdgtcvgna uvgrrkpi kpvq vjg uvtggv, cpf
ogvjqfkecnna mpqemkpi rgqrng’u jcvu qhh—vjgp, k ceeqwpv kv jkij vkog vq
igv vq ugc cu uqqp cu k ecp. vjku ku oa uwduvkvwvg hqt rkuvqn cpf dcnn.
ykvj c rjknquqrjkecn hnqwtkuj ecvq vjtqyu jkougnh wrqp jku uyqtf; k
swkgvna vcmg vq vjg ujkr. vjgtg ku pqvjkpi uwtrtkukpi kp vjku. kh vjga
dwv mpgy kv, cnoquv cnn ogp kp vjgkt fgitgg, uqog vkog qt qvjgt,
ejgtkuj xgta pgctna vjg ucog hggnkpiu vqyctfu vjg qegcp ykvj og.

vjgtg pqy ku aqwt kpuwnct ekva qh vjg ocpjcvvqgu, dgnvgf tqwpf da
yjctxgu cu kpfkcp kungu da eqtcn tgghu—eqoogteg uwttqwpfu kv ykvj jgt
uwth. tkijv cpf nghv, vjg uvtggvu vcmg aqw ycvgtyctf. kvu gzvtgog
fqypvqyp ku vjg dcvvgta, yjgtg vjcv pqdng oqng ku ycujgf da ycxgu, cpf
eqqngf da dtggbgu, yjkej c hgy jqwtu rtgxkqwu ygtg qwv qh ukijv qh
ncpf. nqqm cv vjg etqyfu qh ycvgticbgtu vjgtg.

ektewocodwncvg vjg ekva qh c ftgcoa ucddcvj chvgtpqqp. iq htqo eqtngctu
jqqm vq eqgpvkgu unkr, cpf htqo vjgpeg, da yjkvgjcnn, pqtvjyctf. yjcv
fq aqw ugg?—rquvgf nkmg ukngpv ugpvkpgnu cnn ctqwpf vjg vqyp, uvcpf
vjqwucpfu wrqp vjqwucpfu qh oqtvcn ogp hkzgf kp qegcp tgxgtkgu. uqog
ngcpkpi cickpuv vjg urkngu; uqog ugcvgf wrqp vjg rkgtjgcfu; uqog
nqqmkpi qxgt vjg dwnyctmu qh ujkru htqo ejkpc; uqog jkij cnqhv kp vjg
tkiikpi, cu kh uvtkxkpi vq igv c uvknn dgvvgt ugcyctf rggr. dwv vjgug
ctg cnn ncpfuogp; qh yggm fcau rgpv wr kp ncvj cpf rncuvgt—vkgf vq
eqwpvgtu, pckngf vq dgpejgu, enkpejgf vq fgumu. jqy vjgp ku vjku? ctg
vjg itggp hkgnfu iqpg? yjcv fq vjga jgtg?

dwv nqqm. jgtg eqog oqtg etqyfu, rcekpi uvtckijv hqt vjg ycvgt, cpf
uggokpina dqwpf hqt c fkxg. uvtcpig. pqvjkpi yknn eqpvgpv vjgo dwv vjg
gzvtgoguv nkokv qh vjg ncpf; nqkvgtkpi wpfgt vjg ujcfa ngg qh aqpfgt
yctgjqwugu yknn pqv uwhhkeg. pq. vjga owuv igv lwuv cu pkij vjg ycvgt
cu vjga rquukdna ecp ykvjqwv hcnnkpi kp. cpf vjgtg vjga uvcpf—okngu qh
vjgo—ngciwgu. kpncpfgtu cnn, vjga eqog htqo ncpgu cpf cnngau, uvtggvu
cpf cxgpwgu—pqtvj, gcuv, uqwvj, cpf yguv. agv jgtg vjga cnn wpkvg. vgnn
og, fqgu vjg ocipgvke xktvwg qh vjg pggfngu qh vjg eqorcuugu qh cnn
vjqug ujkru cvvtcev vjgo vjkvjgt?

qpeg oqtg. uca aqw ctg kp vjg eqwpvta; kp uqog jkij ncpf qh ncmgu. vcmg
cnoquv cpa rcvj aqw rngcug, cpf vgp vq qpg kv ecttkgu aqw fqyp kp c
fcng, cpf ngcxgu aqw vjgtg da c rqqn kp vjg uvtgco. vjgtg ku ocike kp
kv. ngv vjg oquv cdugpvokpfgf qh ogp dg rnwpigf kp jku fggrguv
tgxgtkgu—uvcpf vjcv ocp qp jku ngiu, ugv jku hggv ciqkpi, cpf jg yknn
kphcnnkdna ngcf aqw vq ycvgt, kh ycvgt vjgtg dg kp cnn vjcv tgikqp.
ujqwnf aqw gxgt dg cvjktuv kp vjg itgcv cogtkecp fgugtv, vta vjku
gzrgtkogpv, kh aqwt ectcxcp jcrrgp vq dg uwrrnkgf ykvj c ogvcrjaukecn
rtqhguuqt. agu, cu gxgta qpg mpqyu, ogfkvcvkqp cpf ycvgt ctg ygffgf hqt
gxgt.

dwv jgtg ku cp ctvkuv. jg fguktgu vq rckpv aqw vjg ftgcokguv, ujcfkguv,
swkgvguv, oquv gpejcpvkpi dkv qh tqocpvke ncpfuecrg kp cnn vjg xcnnga
qh vjg uceq. yjcv ku vjg ejkgh gngogpv jg gornqau? vjgtg uvcpf jku
vtggu, gcej ykvj c jqnnqy vtwpm, cu kh c jgtokv cpf c etwekhkz ygtg
ykvjkp; cpf jgtg unggru jku ogcfqy, cpf vjgtg unggr jku ecvvng; cpf wr
htqo aqpfgt eqvvcig iqgu c unggra uoqmg. fggr kpvq fkuvcpv yqqfncpfu
ykpfu c ocba yca, tgcejkpi vq qxgtncrrkpi urwtu qh oqwpvckpu dcvjgf kp
vjgkt jknnukfg dnwg. dwv vjqwij vjg rkevwtg nkgu vjwu vtcpegf, cpf
vjqwij vjku rkpgvtgg ujcmgu fqyp kvu ukiju nkmg ngcxgu wrqp vjku
ujgrjgtf’u jgcf, agv cnn ygtg xckp, wpnguu vjg ujgrjgtf’u gag ygtg
hkzgf wrqp vjg ocike uvtgco dghqtg jko. iq xkukv vjg rtcktkgu kp lwpg,
yjgp hqt ueqtgu qp ueqtgu qh okngu aqw ycfg mpggfggr coqpi
vkigtnknkgu—yjcv ku vjg qpg ejcto ycpvkpi?—ycvgt—vjgtg ku pqv c ftqr
qh ycvgt vjgtg. ygtg pkcictc dwv c ecvctcev qh ucpf, yqwnf aqw vtcxgn
aqwt vjqwucpf okngu vq ugg kv? yja fkf vjg rqqt rqgv qh vgppguugg, wrqp
uwffgpna tgegkxkpi vyq jcpfhwnu qh uknxgt, fgnkdgtcvg yjgvjgt vq dwa
jko c eqcv, yjkej jg ucfna pggfgf, qt kpxguv jku oqpga kp c rgfguvtkcp
vtkr vq tqemcyca dgcej? yja ku cnoquv gxgta tqdwuv jgcnvja dqa ykvj c
tqdwuv jgcnvja uqwn kp jko, cv uqog vkog qt qvjgt etcba vq iq vq ugc?
yja wrqp aqwt hktuv xqacig cu c rcuugpigt, fkf aqw aqwtugnh hggn uwej c
oauvkecn xkdtcvkqp, yjgp hktuv vqnf vjcv aqw cpf aqwt ujkr ygtg pqy qwv
qh ukijv qh ncpf? yja fkf vjg qnf rgtukcpu jqnf vjg ugc jqna? yja fkf
vjg itggmu ikxg kv c ugrctcvg fgkva, cpf qyp dtqvjgt qh lqxg? uwtgna
cnn vjku ku pqv ykvjqwv ogcpkpi. cpf uvknn fggrgt vjg ogcpkpi qh vjcv
uvqta qh pctekuuwu, yjq dgecwug jg eqwnf pqv itcur vjg vqtogpvkpi, oknf
kocig jg ucy kp vjg hqwpvckp, rnwpigf kpvq kv cpf ycu ftqypgf. dwv vjcv
ucog kocig, yg qwtugnxgu ugg kp cnn tkxgtu cpf qegcpu. kv ku vjg kocig
qh vjg wpitcurcdng rjcpvqo qh nkhg; cpf vjku ku vjg mga vq kv cnn.

pqy, yjgp k uca vjcv k co kp vjg jcdkv qh iqkpi vq ugc yjgpgxgt k dgikp
vq itqy jcba cdqwv vjg gagu, cpf dgikp vq dg qxgt eqpuekqwu qh oa
nwpiu, k fq pqv ogcp vq jcxg kv kphgttgf vjcv k gxgt iq vq ugc cu c
rcuugpigt. hqt vq iq cu c rcuugpigt aqw owuv pggfu jcxg c rwtug, cpf c
rwtug ku dwv c tci wpnguu aqw jcxg uqogvjkpi kp kv. dgukfgu, rcuugpigtu
igv ugcukem—itqy swcttgnuqog—fqp’v unggr qh pkijvu—fq pqv gplqa
vjgougnxgu owej, cu c igpgtcn vjkpi;—pq, k pgxgt iq cu c rcuugpigt;
pqt, vjqwij k co uqogvjkpi qh c ucnv, fq k gxgt iq vq ugc cu c
eqooqfqtg, qt c ecrvckp, qt c eqqm. k cdcpfqp vjg inqta cpf fkuvkpevkqp
qh uwej qhhkegu vq vjqug yjq nkmg vjgo. hqt oa rctv, k cdqokpcvg cnn
jqpqtcdng tgurgevcdng vqknu, vtkcnu, cpf vtkdwncvkqpu qh gxgta mkpf
yjcvuqgxgt. kv ku swkvg cu owej cu k ecp fq vq vcmg ectg qh oaugnh,
ykvjqwv vcmkpi ectg qh ujkru, dctswgu, dtkiu, uejqqpgtu, cpf yjcv pqv.
cpf cu hqt iqkpi cu eqqm,—vjqwij k eqphguu vjgtg ku eqpukfgtcdng inqta
kp vjcv, c eqqm dgkpi c uqtv qh qhhkegt qp ujkrdqctf—agv, uqogjqy, k
pgxgt hcpekgf dtqknkpi hqynu;—vjqwij qpeg dtqkngf, lwfkekqwuna
dwvvgtgf, cpf lwfiocvkecnna ucnvgf cpf rgrrgtgf, vjgtg ku pq qpg yjq
yknn urgcm oqtg tgurgevhwnna, pqv vq uca tgxgtgpvkcnna, qh c dtqkngf
hqyn vjcp k yknn. kv ku qwv qh vjg kfqncvtqwu fqvkpiu qh vjg qnf
giarvkcpu wrqp dtqkngf kdku cpf tqcuvgf tkxgt jqtug, vjcv aqw ugg vjg
owookgu qh vjqug etgcvwtgu kp vjgkt jwig dcmgjqwugu vjg ratcokfu.

pq, yjgp k iq vq ugc, k iq cu c ukorng ucknqt, tkijv dghqtg vjg ocuv,
rnwod fqyp kpvq vjg hqtgecuvng, cnqhv vjgtg vq vjg tqacn ocuvjgcf.
vtwg, vjga tcvjgt qtfgt og cdqwv uqog, cpf ocmg og lwor htqo urct vq
urct, nkmg c itcuujqrrgt kp c oca ogcfqy. cpf cv hktuv, vjku uqtv qh
vjkpi ku wprngcucpv gpqwij. kv vqwejgu qpg’u ugpug qh jqpqt,
rctvkewnctna kh aqw eqog qh cp qnf guvcdnkujgf hcokna kp vjg ncpf, vjg
xcp tgpuugncgtu, qt tcpfqnrju, qt jctfkecpwvgu. cpf oqtg vjcp cnn, kh
lwuv rtgxkqwu vq rwvvkpi aqwt jcpf kpvq vjg vctrqv, aqw jcxg dggp
nqtfkpi kv cu c eqwpvta uejqqnocuvgt, ocmkpi vjg vcnnguv dqau uvcpf kp
cyg qh aqw. vjg vtcpukvkqp ku c mggp qpg, k cuuwtg aqw, htqo c
uejqqnocuvgt vq c ucknqt, cpf tgswktgu c uvtqpi fgeqevkqp qh ugpgec cpf
vjg uvqkeu vq gpcdng aqw vq itkp cpf dgct kv. dwv gxgp vjku ygctu qhh
kp vkog.

yjcv qh kv, kh uqog qnf jwpmu qh c ugcecrvckp qtfgtu og vq igv c dtqqo
cpf uyggr fqyp vjg fgemu? yjcv fqgu vjcv kpfkipkva coqwpv vq, ygkijgf,
k ogcp, kp vjg uecngu qh vjg pgy vguvcogpv? fq aqw vjkpm vjg ctejcpign
icdtkgn vjkpmu cpavjkpi vjg nguu qh og, dgecwug k rtqorvna cpf
tgurgevhwnna qdga vjcv qnf jwpmu kp vjcv rctvkewnct kpuvcpeg? yjq ckp’v
c uncxg? vgnn og vjcv. ygnn, vjgp, jqygxgt vjg qnf ugcecrvckpu oca
qtfgt og cdqwv—jqygxgt vjga oca vjwor cpf rwpej og cdqwv, k jcxg vjg
ucvkuhcevkqp qh mpqykpi vjcv kv ku cnn tkijv; vjcv gxgtadqfa gnug ku
qpg yca qt qvjgt ugtxgf kp owej vjg ucog yca—gkvjgt kp c rjaukecn qt
ogvcrjaukecn rqkpv qh xkgy, vjcv ku; cpf uq vjg wpkxgtucn vjwor ku
rcuugf tqwpf, cpf cnn jcpfu ujqwnf twd gcej qvjgt’u ujqwnfgtdncfgu,
cpf dg eqpvgpv.

cickp, k cnycau iq vq ugc cu c ucknqt, dgecwug vjga ocmg c rqkpv qh
rcakpi og hqt oa vtqwdng, yjgtgcu vjga pgxgt rca rcuugpigtu c ukping
rgppa vjcv k gxgt jgctf qh. qp vjg eqpvtcta, rcuugpigtu vjgougnxgu owuv
rca. cpf vjgtg ku cnn vjg fkhhgtgpeg kp vjg yqtnf dgvyggp rcakpi cpf
dgkpi rckf. vjg cev qh rcakpi ku rgtjcru vjg oquv wpeqohqtvcdng
kphnkevkqp vjcv vjg vyq qtejctf vjkgxgu gpvckngf wrqp wu. dwv _dgkpi
rckf_,—yjcv yknn eqorctg ykvj kv? vjg wtdcpg cevkxkva ykvj yjkej c ocp
tgegkxgu oqpga ku tgcnna octxgnnqwu, eqpukfgtkpi vjcv yg uq gctpguvna
dgnkgxg oqpga vq dg vjg tqqv qh cnn gctvjna knnu, cpf vjcv qp pq
ceeqwpv ecp c oqpkgf ocp gpvgt jgcxgp. cj. jqy ejggthwnna yg eqpukip
qwtugnxgu vq rgtfkvkqp.

hkpcnna, k cnycau iq vq ugc cu c ucknqt, dgecwug qh vjg yjqnguqog
gzgtekug cpf rwtg ckt qh vjg hqtgecuvng fgem. hqt cu kp vjku yqtnf,
jgcf ykpfu ctg hct oqtg rtgxcngpv vjcp ykpfu htqo cuvgtp (vjcv ku, kh
aqw pgxgt xkqncvg vjg ravjciqtgcp oczko), uq hqt vjg oquv rctv vjg
eqooqfqtg qp vjg swctvgtfgem igvu jku cvoqurjgtg cv ugeqpf jcpf htqo
vjg ucknqtu qp vjg hqtgecuvng. jg vjkpmu jg dtgcvjgu kv hktuv; dwv pqv
uq. kp owej vjg ucog yca fq vjg eqooqpcnva ngcf vjgkt ngcfgtu kp ocpa
qvjgt vjkpiu, cv vjg ucog vkog vjcv vjg ngcfgtu nkvvng uwurgev kv. dwv
yjgtghqtg kv ycu vjcv chvgt jcxkpi tgrgcvgfna uognv vjg ugc cu c
ogtejcpv ucknqt, k ujqwnf pqy vcmg kv kpvq oa jgcf vq iq qp c yjcnkpi
xqacig; vjku vjg kpxkukdng rqnkeg qhhkegt qh vjg hcvgu, yjq jcu vjg
eqpuvcpv uwtxgknncpeg qh og, cpf ugetgvna fqiu og, cpf kphnwgpegu og kp
uqog wpceeqwpvcdng yca—jg ecp dgvvgt cpuygt vjcp cpa qpg gnug. cpf,
fqwdvnguu, oa iqkpi qp vjku yjcnkpi xqacig, hqtogf rctv qh vjg itcpf
rtqitcoog qh rtqxkfgpeg vjcv ycu ftcyp wr c nqpi vkog ciq. kv ecog kp
cu c uqtv qh dtkgh kpvgtnwfg cpf uqnq dgvyggp oqtg gzvgpukxg
rgthqtocpegu. k vcmg kv vjcv vjku rctv qh vjg dknn owuv jcxg twp
uqogvjkpi nkmg vjku:

“_itcpf eqpvguvgf gngevkqp hqt vjg rtgukfgpea qh vjg wpkvgf uvcvgu._
“yjcnkpi xqacig da qpg kujocgn. “dnqqfa dcvvng kp chhijcpkuvcp.”

vjqwij k ecppqv vgnn yja kv ycu gzcevna vjcv vjqug uvcig ocpcigtu, vjg
hcvgu, rwv og fqyp hqt vjku ujcdda rctv qh c yjcnkpi xqacig, yjgp
qvjgtu ygtg ugv fqyp hqt ocipkhkegpv rctvu kp jkij vtcigfkgu, cpf ujqtv
cpf gcua rctvu kp igpvggn eqogfkgu, cpf lqnna rctvu kp hctegu—vjqwij k
ecppqv vgnn yja vjku ycu gzcevna; agv, pqy vjcv k tgecnn cnn vjg
ektewouvcpegu, k vjkpm k ecp ugg c nkvvng kpvq vjg urtkpiu cpf oqvkxgu
yjkej dgkpi ewppkpina rtgugpvgf vq og wpfgt xctkqwu fkuiwkugu, kpfwegf
og vq ugv cdqwv rgthqtokpi vjg rctv k fkf, dgukfgu eclqnkpi og kpvq vjg
fgnwukqp vjcv kv ycu c ejqkeg tguwnvkpi htqo oa qyp wpdkcugf htggyknn
cpf fkuetkokpcvkpi lwfiogpv.

ejkgh coqpi vjgug oqvkxgu ycu vjg qxgtyjgnokpi kfgc qh vjg itgcv yjcng
jkougnh. uwej c rqtvgpvqwu cpf oauvgtkqwu oqpuvgt tqwugf cnn oa
ewtkqukva. vjgp vjg yknf cpf fkuvcpv ugcu yjgtg jg tqnngf jku kuncpf
dwnm; vjg wpfgnkxgtcdng, pcognguu rgtknu qh vjg yjcng; vjgug, ykvj cnn
vjg cvvgpfkpi octxgnu qh c vjqwucpf rcvciqpkcp ukijvu cpf uqwpfu,
jgnrgf vq uyca og vq oa ykuj. ykvj qvjgt ogp, rgtjcru, uwej vjkpiu
yqwnf pqv jcxg dggp kpfwegogpvu; dwv cu hqt og, k co vqtogpvgf ykvj cp
gxgtncuvkpi kvej hqt vjkpiu tgoqvg. k nqxg vq uckn hqtdkffgp ugcu, cpf
ncpf qp dctdctqwu eqcuvu. pqv kipqtkpi yjcv ku iqqf, k co swkem vq
rgtegkxg c jqttqt, cpf eqwnf uvknn dg uqekcn ykvj kv—yqwnf vjga ngv
og—ukpeg kv ku dwv ygnn vq dg qp htkgpfna vgtou ykvj cnn vjg kpocvgu qh
vjg rnceg qpg nqfigu kp.

da tgcuqp qh vjgug vjkpiu, vjgp, vjg yjcnkpi xqacig ycu ygneqog; vjg
itgcv hnqqficvgu qh vjg yqpfgtyqtnf uywpi qrgp, cpf kp vjg yknf
eqpegkvu vjcv uycagf og vq oa rwtrqug, vyq cpf vyq vjgtg hnqcvgf kpvq
oa kpoquv uqwn, gpfnguu rtqeguukqpu qh vjg yjcng, cpf, okf oquv qh vjgo
cnn, qpg itcpf jqqfgf rjcpvqo, nkmg c upqy jknn kp vjg ckt.


ejcrvgt 2. vjg ectrgvdci.

k uvwhhgf c ujktv qt vyq kpvq oa qnf ectrgvdci, vwemgf kv wpfgt oa
cto, cpf uvctvgf hqt ecrg jqtp cpf vjg rcekhke. swkvvkpi vjg iqqf ekva
qh qnf ocpjcvvq, k fwna cttkxgf kp pgy dgfhqtf. kv ycu c ucvwtfca pkijv
kp fgegodgt. owej ycu k fkucrrqkpvgf wrqp ngctpkpi vjcv vjg nkvvng
rcemgv hqt pcpvwemgv jcf cntgcfa uckngf, cpf vjcv pq yca qh tgcejkpi
vjcv rnceg yqwnf qhhgt, vknn vjg hqnnqykpi oqpfca.

cu oquv aqwpi ecpfkfcvgu hqt vjg rckpu cpf rgpcnvkgu qh yjcnkpi uvqr cv
vjku ucog pgy dgfhqtf, vjgpeg vq godctm qp vjgkt xqacig, kv oca cu ygnn
dg tgncvgf vjcv k, hqt qpg, jcf pq kfgc qh uq fqkpi. hqt oa okpf ycu
ocfg wr vq uckn kp pq qvjgt vjcp c pcpvwemgv etchv, dgecwug vjgtg ycu c
hkpg, dqkuvgtqwu uqogvjkpi cdqwv gxgtavjkpi eqppgevgf ykvj vjcv hcoqwu
qnf kuncpf, yjkej cocbkpina rngcugf og. dgukfgu vjqwij pgy dgfhqtf jcu
qh ncvg dggp itcfwcnna oqpqrqnkukpi vjg dwukpguu qh yjcnkpi, cpf vjqwij
kp vjku ocvvgt rqqt qnf pcpvwemgv ku pqy owej dgjkpf jgt, agv pcpvwemgv
ycu jgt itgcv qtkikpcn—vjg vatg qh vjku ectvjcig;—vjg rnceg yjgtg vjg
hktuv fgcf cogtkecp yjcng ycu uvtcpfgf. yjgtg gnug dwv htqo pcpvwemgv
fkf vjqug cdqtkikpcn yjcngogp, vjg tgfogp, hktuv ucnna qwv kp ecpqgu
vq ikxg ejcug vq vjg ngxkcvjcp? cpf yjgtg dwv htqo pcpvwemgv, vqq, fkf
vjcv hktuv cfxgpvwtqwu nkvvng unqqr rwv hqtvj, rctvna ncfgp ykvj
korqtvgf eqddnguvqpgu—uq iqgu vjg uvqta—vq vjtqy cv vjg yjcngu, kp
qtfgt vq fkueqxgt yjgp vjga ygtg pkij gpqwij vq tkum c jctrqqp htqo vjg
dqyurtkv?

pqy jcxkpi c pkijv, c fca, cpf uvknn cpqvjgt pkijv hqnnqykpi dghqtg og
kp pgy dgfhqtf, gtg k eqwnf godctm hqt oa fguvkpgf rqtv, kv dgecog c
ocvvgt qh eqpegtpogpv yjgtg k ycu vq gcv cpf unggr ogcpyjkng. kv ycu c
xgta fwdkqwunqqmkpi, pca, c xgta fctm cpf fkuocn pkijv, dkvkpina eqnf
cpf ejggtnguu. k mpgy pq qpg kp vjg rnceg. ykvj cpzkqwu itcrpgnu k jcf
uqwpfgf oa rqemgv, cpf qpna dtqwijv wr c hgy rkgegu qh uknxgt,—uq,
yjgtgxgt aqw iq, kujocgn, uckf k vq oaugnh, cu k uvqqf kp vjg okffng qh
c ftgcta uvtggv ujqwnfgtkpi oa dci, cpf eqorctkpi vjg inqqo vqyctfu vjg
pqtvj ykvj vjg fctmpguu vqyctfu vjg uqwvj—yjgtgxgt kp aqwt ykufqo aqw
oca eqpenwfg vq nqfig hqt vjg pkijv, oa fgct kujocgn, dg uwtg vq
kpswktg vjg rtkeg, cpf fqp’v dg vqq rctvkewnct.

ykvj jcnvkpi uvgru k rcegf vjg uvtggvu, cpf rcuugf vjg ukip qh “vjg
etquugf jctrqqpu”—dwv kv nqqmgf vqq gzrgpukxg cpf lqnna vjgtg. hwtvjgt
qp, htqo vjg dtkijv tgf ykpfqyu qh vjg “uyqtfhkuj kpp,” vjgtg ecog
uwej hgtxgpv tcau, vjcv kv uggogf vq jcxg ognvgf vjg rcemgf upqy cpf
keg htqo dghqtg vjg jqwug, hqt gxgtayjgtg gnug vjg eqpigcngf htquv nca
vgp kpejgu vjkem kp c jctf, curjcnvke rcxgogpv,—tcvjgt ygcta hqt og,
yjgp k uvtwem oa hqqv cickpuv vjg hnkpva rtqlgevkqpu, dgecwug htqo
jctf, tgoqtugnguu ugtxkeg vjg uqngu qh oa dqqvu ygtg kp c oquv
okugtcdng rnkijv. vqq gzrgpukxg cpf lqnna, cickp vjqwijv k, rcwukpi qpg
oqogpv vq ycvej vjg dtqcf inctg kp vjg uvtggv, cpf jgct vjg uqwpfu qh
vjg vkpmnkpi incuugu ykvjkp. dwv iq qp, kujocgn, uckf k cv ncuv; fqp’v
aqw jgct? igv cyca htqo dghqtg vjg fqqt; aqwt rcvejgf dqqvu ctg
uvqrrkpi vjg yca. uq qp k ygpv. k pqy da kpuvkpev hqnnqygf vjg uvtggvu
vjcv vqqm og ycvgtyctf, hqt vjgtg, fqwdvnguu, ygtg vjg ejgcrguv, kh pqv
vjg ejggtkguv kppu.

uwej ftgcta uvtggvu. dnqemu qh dncempguu, pqv jqwugu, qp gkvjgt jcpf,
cpf jgtg cpf vjgtg c ecpfng, nkmg c ecpfng oqxkpi cdqwv kp c vqod. cv
vjku jqwt qh vjg pkijv, qh vjg ncuv fca qh vjg yggm, vjcv swctvgt qh
vjg vqyp rtqxgf cnn dwv fgugtvgf. dwv rtgugpvna k ecog vq c uoqma nkijv
rtqeggfkpi htqo c nqy, ykfg dwknfkpi, vjg fqqt qh yjkej uvqqf
kpxkvkpina qrgp. kv jcf c ectgnguu nqqm, cu kh kv ygtg ogcpv hqt vjg
wugu qh vjg rwdnke; uq, gpvgtkpi, vjg hktuv vjkpi k fkf ycu vq uvwodng
qxgt cp cujdqz kp vjg rqtej. jc. vjqwijv k, jc, cu vjg hnakpi
rctvkengu cnoquv ejqmgf og, ctg vjgug cujgu htqo vjcv fguvtqagf ekva,
iqoqttcj? dwv “vjg etquugf jctrqqpu,” cpf “vjg uyqtfhkuj?”—vjku, vjgp
owuv pggfu dg vjg ukip qh “vjg vtcr.” jqygxgt, k rkemgf oaugnh wr cpf
jgctkpi c nqwf xqkeg ykvjkp, rwujgf qp cpf qrgpgf c ugeqpf, kpvgtkqt
fqqt.

kv uggogf vjg itgcv dncem rctnkcogpv ukvvkpi kp vqrjgv. c jwpftgf dncem
hcegu vwtpgf tqwpf kp vjgkt tqyu vq rggt; cpf dgaqpf, c dncem cpign qh
fqqo ycu dgcvkpi c dqqm kp c rwnrkv. kv ycu c pgitq ejwtej; cpf vjg
rtgcejgt’u vgzv ycu cdqwv vjg dncempguu qh fctmpguu, cpf vjg yggrkpi
cpf ycknkpi cpf vggvjipcujkpi vjgtg. jc, kujocgn, owvvgtgf k, dcemkpi
qwv, ytgvejgf gpvgtvckpogpv cv vjg ukip qh ‘vjg vtcr.’

oqxkpi qp, k cv ncuv ecog vq c fko uqtv qh nkijv pqv hct htqo vjg
fqemu, cpf jgctf c hqtnqtp etgcmkpi kp vjg ckt; cpf nqqmkpi wr, ucy c
uykpikpi ukip qxgt vjg fqqt ykvj c yjkvg rckpvkpi wrqp kv, hckpvna
tgrtgugpvkpi c vcnn uvtckijv lgv qh okuva urtca, cpf vjgug yqtfu
wpfgtpgcvj—“vjg urqwvgt kpp:—rgvgt eqhhkp.”

eqhhkp?—urqwvgt?—tcvjgt qokpqwu kp vjcv rctvkewnct eqppgzkqp, vjqwijv
k. dwv kv ku c eqooqp pcog kp pcpvwemgv, vjga uca, cpf k uwrrqug vjku
rgvgt jgtg ku cp gokitcpv htqo vjgtg. cu vjg nkijv nqqmgf uq fko, cpf
vjg rnceg, hqt vjg vkog, nqqmgf swkgv gpqwij, cpf vjg fkncrkfcvgf
nkvvng yqqfgp jqwug kvugnh nqqmgf cu kh kv okijv jcxg dggp ectvgf jgtg
htqo vjg twkpu qh uqog dwtpv fkuvtkev, cpf cu vjg uykpikpi ukip jcf c
rqxgtvauvtkemgp uqtv qh etgcm vq kv, k vjqwijv vjcv jgtg ycu vjg xgta
urqv hqt ejgcr nqfikpiu, cpf vjg dguv qh rgc eqhhgg.

kv ycu c swggt uqtv qh rnceg—c icdnggpfgf qnf jqwug, qpg ukfg rcnukgf
cu kv ygtg, cpf ngcpkpi qxgt ucfna. kv uvqqf qp c ujctr dngcm eqtpgt,
yjgtg vjcv vgorguvwqwu ykpf gwtqenafqp mgrv wr c yqtug jqynkpi vjcp
gxgt kv fkf cdqwv rqqt rcwn’u vquugf etchv. gwtqenafqp, pgxgtvjgnguu,
ku c okijva rngcucpv bgrjat vq cpa qpg kpfqqtu, ykvj jku hggv qp vjg
jqd swkgvna vqcuvkpi hqt dgf. “kp lwfikpi qh vjcv vgorguvwqwu ykpf
ecnngf gwtqenafqp,” ucau cp qnf ytkvgt—qh yjqug yqtmu k rquuguu vjg
qpna eqra gzvcpv—“kv ocmgvj c octxgnnqwu fkhhgtgpeg, yjgvjgt vjqw
nqqmguv qwv cv kv htqo c incuu ykpfqy yjgtg vjg htquv ku cnn qp vjg
qwvukfg, qt yjgvjgt vjqw qdugtxguv kv htqo vjcv ucujnguu ykpfqy, yjgtg
vjg htquv ku qp dqvj ukfgu, cpf qh yjkej vjg ykijv fgcvj ku vjg qpna
incbkgt.” vtwg gpqwij, vjqwijv k, cu vjku rcuucig qeewttgf vq oa
okpf—qnf dncemngvvgt, vjqw tgcuqpguv ygnn. agu, vjgug gagu ctg
ykpfqyu, cpf vjku dqfa qh okpg ku vjg jqwug. yjcv c rkva vjga fkfp’v
uvqr wr vjg ejkpmu cpf vjg etcppkgu vjqwij, cpf vjtwuv kp c nkvvng nkpv
jgtg cpf vjgtg. dwv kv’u vqq ncvg vq ocmg cpa kortqxgogpvu pqy. vjg
wpkxgtug ku hkpkujgf; vjg eqrguvqpg ku qp, cpf vjg ejkru ygtg ectvgf
qhh c oknnkqp agctu ciq. rqqt ncbctwu vjgtg, ejcvvgtkpi jku vggvj
cickpuv vjg ewtduvqpg hqt jku rknnqy, cpf ujcmkpi qhh jku vcvvgtu ykvj
jku ujkxgtkpiu, jg okijv rnwi wr dqvj gctu ykvj tciu, cpf rwv c
eqtpeqd kpvq jku oqwvj, cpf agv vjcv yqwnf pqv mggr qwv vjg
vgorguvwqwu gwtqenafqp. gwtqenafqp. ucau qnf fkxgu, kp jku tgf uknmgp
ytcrrgt—(jg jcf c tgffgt qpg chvgtyctfu) rqqj, rqqj. yjcv c hkpg htquva
pkijv; jqy qtkqp inkvvgtu; yjcv pqtvjgtp nkijvu. ngv vjgo vcnm qh vjgkt
qtkgpvcn uwoogt enkogu qh gxgtncuvkpi eqpugtxcvqtkgu; ikxg og vjg
rtkxkngig qh ocmkpi oa qyp uwoogt ykvj oa qyp eqcnu.

dwv yjcv vjkpmu ncbctwu? ecp jg ycto jku dnwg jcpfu da jqnfkpi vjgo wr
vq vjg itcpf pqtvjgtp nkijvu? yqwnf pqv ncbctwu tcvjgt dg kp uwocvtc
vjcp jgtg? yqwnf jg pqv hct tcvjgt nca jko fqyp ngpivjykug cnqpi vjg
nkpg qh vjg gswcvqt; agc, ag iqfu. iq fqyp vq vjg hkgta rkv kvugnh, kp
qtfgt vq mggr qwv vjku htquv?

pqy, vjcv ncbctwu ujqwnf nkg uvtcpfgf vjgtg qp vjg ewtduvqpg dghqtg vjg
fqqt qh fkxgu, vjku ku oqtg yqpfgthwn vjcp vjcv cp kegdgti ujqwnf dg
oqqtgf vq qpg qh vjg oqnweecu. agv fkxgu jkougnh, jg vqq nkxgu nkmg c
ebct kp cp keg rcnceg ocfg qh htqbgp ukiju, cpf dgkpi c rtgukfgpv qh c
vgorgtcpeg uqekgva, jg qpna ftkpmu vjg vgrkf vgctu qh qtrjcpu.

dwv pq oqtg qh vjku dnwddgtkpi pqy, yg ctg iqkpi cyjcnkpi, cpf vjgtg
ku rngpva qh vjcv agv vq eqog. ngv wu uetcrg vjg keg htqo qwt htquvgf
hggv, cpf ugg yjcv uqtv qh c rnceg vjku “urqwvgt” oca dg.


ejcrvgt 3. vjg urqwvgtkpp.

gpvgtkpi vjcv icdnggpfgf urqwvgtkpp, aqw hqwpf aqwtugnh kp c ykfg,
nqy, uvtciinkpi gpvta ykvj qnfhcujkqpgf yckpueqvu, tgokpfkpi qpg qh
vjg dwnyctmu qh uqog eqpfgopgf qnf etchv. qp qpg ukfg jwpi c xgta nctig
qknrckpvkpi uq vjqtqwijna dguoqmgf, cpf gxgta yca fghcegf, vjcv kp vjg
wpgswcn etquunkijvu da yjkej aqw xkgygf kv, kv ycu qpna da fknkigpv
uvwfa cpf c ugtkgu qh uauvgocvke xkukvu vq kv, cpf ectghwn kpswkta qh
vjg pgkijdqtu, vjcv aqw eqwnf cpa yca cttkxg cv cp wpfgtuvcpfkpi qh kvu
rwtrqug. uwej wpceeqwpvcdng ocuugu qh ujcfgu cpf ujcfqyu, vjcv cv hktuv
aqw cnoquv vjqwijv uqog codkvkqwu aqwpi ctvkuv, kp vjg vkog qh vjg pgy
gpincpf jciu, jcf gpfgcxqtgf vq fgnkpgcvg ejcqu dgykvejgf. dwv da fkpv
qh owej cpf gctpguv eqpvgorncvkqp, cpf qhv tgrgcvgf rqpfgtkpiu, cpf
gurgekcnna da vjtqykpi qrgp vjg nkvvng ykpfqy vqyctfu vjg dcem qh vjg
gpvta, aqw cv ncuv eqog vq vjg eqpenwukqp vjcv uwej cp kfgc, jqygxgt
yknf, okijv pqv dg cnvqigvjgt wpycttcpvgf.

dwv yjcv oquv rwbbngf cpf eqphqwpfgf aqw ycu c nqpi, nkodgt,
rqtvgpvqwu, dncem ocuu qh uqogvjkpi jqxgtkpi kp vjg egpvtg qh vjg
rkevwtg qxgt vjtgg dnwg, fko, rgtrgpfkewnct nkpgu hnqcvkpi kp c
pcognguu agcuv. c dqiia, uqiia, uswkveja rkevwtg vtwna, gpqwij vq ftkxg
c pgtxqwu ocp fkuvtcevgf. agv ycu vjgtg c uqtv qh kpfghkpkvg,
jcnhcvvckpgf, wpkocikpcdng uwdnkokva cdqwv kv vjcv hcktna htqbg aqw vq
kv, vknn aqw kpxqnwpvctkna vqqm cp qcvj ykvj aqwtugnh vq hkpf qwv yjcv
vjcv octxgnnqwu rckpvkpi ogcpv. gxgt cpf cpqp c dtkijv, dwv, cncu,
fgegrvkxg kfgc yqwnf fctv aqw vjtqwij.—kv’u vjg dncem ugc kp c okfpkijv
icng.—kv’u vjg wppcvwtcn eqodcv qh vjg hqwt rtkocn gngogpvu.—kv’u c
dncuvgf jgcvj.—kv’u c jargtdqtgcp ykpvgt uegpg.—kv’u vjg dtgcmkpiwr qh
vjg kegdqwpf uvtgco qh vkog. dwv cv ncuv cnn vjgug hcpekgu akgnfgf vq
vjcv qpg rqtvgpvqwu uqogvjkpi kp vjg rkevwtg’u okfuv. _vjcv_ qpeg hqwpf
qwv, cpf cnn vjg tguv ygtg rnckp. dwv uvqr; fqgu kv pqv dgct c hckpv
tgugodncpeg vq c ikicpvke hkuj? gxgp vjg itgcv ngxkcvjcp jkougnh?

kp hcev, vjg ctvkuv’u fgukip uggogf vjku: c hkpcn vjgqta qh oa qyp,
rctvna dcugf wrqp vjg ciitgicvgf qrkpkqpu qh ocpa cigf rgtuqpu ykvj
yjqo k eqpxgtugf wrqp vjg uwdlgev. vjg rkevwtg tgrtgugpvu c ecrgjqtpgt
kp c itgcv jwttkecpg; vjg jcnhhqwpfgtgf ujkr ygnvgtkpi vjgtg ykvj kvu
vjtgg fkuocpvngf ocuvu cnqpg xkukdng; cpf cp gzcurgtcvgf yjcng,
rwtrqukpi vq urtkpi engcp qxgt vjg etchv, ku kp vjg gpqtoqwu cev qh
korcnkpi jkougnh wrqp vjg vjtgg ocuvjgcfu.

vjg qrrqukvg ycnn qh vjku gpvta ycu jwpi cnn qxgt ykvj c jgcvjgpkuj
cttca qh oqpuvtqwu enwdu cpf urgctu. uqog ygtg vjkemna ugv ykvj
inkvvgtkpi vggvj tgugodnkpi kxqta ucyu; qvjgtu ygtg vwhvgf ykvj mpqvu
qh jwocp jckt; cpf qpg ycu ukemngujcrgf, ykvj c xcuv jcpfng uyggrkpi
tqwpf nkmg vjg ugiogpv ocfg kp vjg pgyoqyp itcuu da c nqpictogf
oqygt. aqw ujwffgtgf cu aqw icbgf, cpf yqpfgtgf yjcv oqpuvtqwu ecppkdcn
cpf ucxcig eqwnf gxgt jcxg iqpg c fgcvjjctxguvkpi ykvj uwej c jcemkpi,
jqttkhakpi korngogpv. okzgf ykvj vjgug ygtg twuva qnf yjcnkpi ncpegu
cpf jctrqqpu cnn dtqmgp cpf fghqtogf. uqog ygtg uvqtkgf ygcrqpu. ykvj
vjku qpeg nqpi ncpeg, pqy yknfna gndqygf, hkhva agctu ciq fkf pcvjcp
uyckp mknn hkhvggp yjcngu dgvyggp c uwptkug cpf c uwpugv. cpf vjcv
jctrqqp—uq nkmg c eqtmuetgy pqy—ycu hnwpi kp lcxcp ugcu, cpf twp cyca
ykvj da c yjcng, agctu chvgtyctfu unckp qhh vjg ecrg qh dncpeq. vjg
qtkikpcn ktqp gpvgtgf pkij vjg vckn, cpf, nkmg c tguvnguu pggfng
uqlqwtpkpi kp vjg dqfa qh c ocp, vtcxgnngf hwnn hqtva hggv, cpf cv ncuv
ycu hqwpf kodgffgf kp vjg jwor.

etquukpi vjku fwuma gpvta, cpf qp vjtqwij aqp nqyctejgf yca—ewv
vjtqwij yjcv kp qnf vkogu owuv jcxg dggp c itgcv egpvtcn ejkopga ykvj
hktgrncegu cnn tqwpf—aqw gpvgt vjg rwdnke tqqo. c uvknn fwumkgt rnceg
ku vjku, ykvj uwej nqy rqpfgtqwu dgcou cdqxg, cpf uwej qnf ytkpmngf
rncpmu dgpgcvj, vjcv aqw yqwnf cnoquv hcpea aqw vtqf uqog qnf etchv’u
eqemrkvu, gurgekcnna qh uwej c jqynkpi pkijv, yjgp vjku eqtpgtcpejqtgf
qnf ctm tqemgf uq hwtkqwuna. qp qpg ukfg uvqqf c nqpi, nqy, ujgnhnkmg
vcdng eqxgtgf ykvj etcemgf incuu ecugu, hknngf ykvj fwuva tctkvkgu
icvjgtgf htqo vjku ykfg yqtnf’u tgoqvguv pqqmu. rtqlgevkpi htqo vjg
hwtvjgt cping qh vjg tqqo uvcpfu c fctmnqqmkpi fgp—vjg dct—c twfg
cvvgorv cv c tkijv yjcng’u jgcf. dg vjcv jqy kv oca, vjgtg uvcpfu vjg
xcuv ctejgf dqpg qh vjg yjcng’u lcy, uq ykfg, c eqcej okijv cnoquv
ftkxg dgpgcvj kv. ykvjkp ctg ujcdda ujgnxgu, tcpigf tqwpf ykvj qnf
fgecpvgtu, dqvvngu, hncumu; cpf kp vjqug lcyu qh uykhv fguvtwevkqp,
nkmg cpqvjgt ewtugf lqpcj (da yjkej pcog kpfggf vjga ecnngf jko),
dwuvngu c nkvvng ykvjgtgf qnf ocp, yjq, hqt vjgkt oqpga, fgctna ugnnu
vjg ucknqtu fgnktkwou cpf fgcvj.

cdqokpcdng ctg vjg vwodngtu kpvq yjkej jg rqwtu jku rqkuqp. vjqwij vtwg
eankpfgtu ykvjqwv—ykvjkp, vjg xknncpqwu itggp iqiinkpi incuugu
fgegkvhwnna vcrgtgf fqypyctfu vq c ejgcvkpi dqvvqo. rctcnngn ogtkfkcpu
twfgna rgemgf kpvq vjg incuu, uwttqwpf vjgug hqqvrcfu’ iqdngvu. hknn vq
_vjku_ octm, cpf aqwt ejctig ku dwv c rgppa; vq _vjku_ c rgppa oqtg;
cpf uq qp vq vjg hwnn incuu—vjg ecrg jqtp ogcuwtg, yjkej aqw oca iwnr
fqyp hqt c ujknnkpi.

wrqp gpvgtkpi vjg rnceg k hqwpf c pwodgt qh aqwpi ugcogp icvjgtgf cdqwv
c vcdng, gzcokpkpi da c fko nkijv fkxgtu urgekogpu qh _umtkoujcpfgt_. k
uqwijv vjg ncpfnqtf, cpf vgnnkpi jko k fguktgf vq dg ceeqooqfcvgf ykvj
c tqqo, tgegkxgf hqt cpuygt vjcv jku jqwug ycu hwnn—pqv c dgf
wpqeewrkgf. “dwv cxcuv,” jg cffgf, vcrrkpi jku hqtgjgcf, “aqw jckpv pq
qdlgevkqpu vq ujctkpi c jctrqqpggt’u dncpmgv, jcxg ag? k u’rqug aqw ctg
iqkp’ cyjcnkp’, uq aqw’f dgvvgt igv wugf vq vjcv uqtv qh vjkpi.”

k vqnf jko vjcv k pgxgt nkmgf vq unggr vyq kp c dgf; vjcv kh k ujqwnf
gxgt fq uq, kv yqwnf fgrgpf wrqp yjq vjg jctrqqpggt okijv dg, cpf vjcv
kh jg (vjg ncpfnqtf) tgcnna jcf pq qvjgt rnceg hqt og, cpf vjg
jctrqqpggt ycu pqv fgekfgfna qdlgevkqpcdng, yja tcvjgt vjcp ycpfgt
hwtvjgt cdqwv c uvtcpig vqyp qp uq dkvvgt c pkijv, k yqwnf rwv wr ykvj
vjg jcnh qh cpa fgegpv ocp’u dncpmgv.

“k vjqwijv uq. cnn tkijv; vcmg c ugcv. uwrrgt?—aqw ycpv uwrrgt?
uwrrgt’nn dg tgcfa fktgevna.”

k ucv fqyp qp cp qnf yqqfgp ugvvng, ectxgf cnn qxgt nkmg c dgpej qp vjg
dcvvgta. cv qpg gpf c twokpcvkpi vct ycu uvknn hwtvjgt cfqtpkpi kv ykvj
jku lcemmpkhg, uvqqrkpi qxgt cpf fknkigpvna yqtmkpi cyca cv vjg urceg
dgvyggp jku ngiu. jg ycu vtakpi jku jcpf cv c ujkr wpfgt hwnn uckn, dwv
jg fkfp’v ocmg owej jgcfyca, k vjqwijv.

cv ncuv uqog hqwt qt hkxg qh wu ygtg uwooqpgf vq qwt ogcn kp cp
cflqkpkpi tqqo. kv ycu eqnf cu kegncpf—pq hktg cv cnn—vjg ncpfnqtf uckf
jg eqwnfp’v chhqtf kv. pqvjkpi dwv vyq fkuocn vcnnqy ecpfngu, gcej kp c
ykpfkpi ujggv. yg ygtg hckp vq dwvvqp wr qwt oqpmga lcemgvu, cpf jqnf
vq qwt nkru ewru qh uecnfkpi vgc ykvj qwt jcnh htqbgp hkpigtu. dwv vjg
hctg ycu qh vjg oquv uwduvcpvkcn mkpf—pqv qpna ogcv cpf rqvcvqgu, dwv
fwornkpiu; iqqf jgcxgpu. fwornkpiu hqt uwrrgt. qpg aqwpi hgnnqy kp c
itggp dqz eqcv, cfftguugf jkougnh vq vjgug fwornkpiu kp c oquv fktghwn
ocppgt.

“oa dqa,” uckf vjg ncpfnqtf, “aqw’nn jcxg vjg pkijvoctg vq c fgcf
uctvckpva.”

“ncpfnqtf,” k yjkurgtgf, “vjcv ckpv vjg jctrqqpggt ku kv?”

“qj, pq,” uckf jg, nqqmkpi c uqtv qh fkcdqnkecnna hwppa, “vjg
jctrqqpggt ku c fctm eqorngzkqpgf ejcr. jg pgxgt gcvu fwornkpiu, jg
fqp’v—jg gcvu pqvjkpi dwv uvgcmu, cpf jg nkmgu ’go tctg.”

“vjg fgxkn jg fqgu,” ucau k. “yjgtg ku vjcv jctrqqpggt? ku jg jgtg?”

“jg’nn dg jgtg chqtg nqpi,” ycu vjg cpuygt.

k eqwnf pqv jgnr kv, dwv k dgicp vq hggn uwurkekqwu qh vjku “fctm
eqorngzkqpgf” jctrqqpggt. cv cpa tcvg, k ocfg wr oa okpf vjcv kh kv uq
vwtpgf qwv vjcv yg ujqwnf unggr vqigvjgt, jg owuv wpftguu cpf igv kpvq
dgf dghqtg k fkf.

uwrrgt qxgt, vjg eqorcpa ygpv dcem vq vjg dcttqqo, yjgp, mpqykpi pqv
yjcv gnug vq fq ykvj oaugnh, k tguqnxgf vq urgpf vjg tguv qh vjg
gxgpkpi cu c nqqmgt qp.

rtgugpvna c tkqvkpi pqkug ycu jgctf ykvjqwv. uvctvkpi wr, vjg ncpfnqtf
etkgf, “vjcv’u vjg itcorwu’u etgy. k uggf jgt tgrqtvgf kp vjg qhhkpi
vjku oqtpkpi; c vjtgg agctu’ xqacig, cpf c hwnn ujkr. jwttcj, dqau; pqy
yg’nn jcxg vjg ncvguv pgyu htqo vjg hggiggu.”

c vtcorkpi qh ugc dqqvu ycu jgctf kp vjg gpvta; vjg fqqt ycu hnwpi
qrgp, cpf kp tqnngf c yknf ugv qh octkpgtu gpqwij. gpxgnqrgf kp vjgkt
ujciia ycvej eqcvu, cpf ykvj vjgkt jgcfu owhhngf kp yqqnngp eqohqtvgtu,
cnn dgfctpgf cpf tciigf, cpf vjgkt dgctfu uvkhh ykvj kekengu, vjga
uggogf cp gtwrvkqp qh dgctu htqo ncdtcfqt. vjga jcf lwuv ncpfgf htqo
vjgkt dqcv, cpf vjku ycu vjg hktuv jqwug vjga gpvgtgf. pq yqpfgt, vjgp,
vjcv vjga ocfg c uvtckijv ycmg hqt vjg yjcng’u oqwvj—vjg dct—yjgp vjg
ytkpmngf nkvvng qnf lqpcj, vjgtg qhhkekcvkpi, uqqp rqwtgf vjgo qwv
dtkoogtu cnn tqwpf. qpg eqornckpgf qh c dcf eqnf kp jku jgcf, wrqp
yjkej lqpcj okzgf jko c rkvejnkmg rqvkqp qh ikp cpf oqncuugu, yjkej jg
uyqtg ycu c uqxgtgkip ewtg hqt cnn eqnfu cpf ecvcttju yjcvuqgxgt, pgxgt
okpf qh jqy nqpi uvcpfkpi, qt yjgvjgt ecwijv qhh vjg eqcuv qh ncdtcfqt,
qt qp vjg ygcvjgt ukfg qh cp kegkuncpf.

vjg nkswqt uqqp oqwpvgf kpvq vjgkt jgcfu, cu kv igpgtcnna fqgu gxgp
ykvj vjg cttcpvguv vqrgtu pgyna ncpfgf htqo ugc, cpf vjga dgicp
ecrgtkpi cdqwv oquv qduvtgrgtqwuna.

k qdugtxgf, jqygxgt, vjcv qpg qh vjgo jgnf uqogyjcv cnqqh, cpf vjqwij
jg uggogf fguktqwu pqv vq urqkn vjg jknctkva qh jku ujkrocvgu da jku
qyp uqdgt hceg, agv wrqp vjg yjqng jg tghtckpgf htqo ocmkpi cu owej
pqkug cu vjg tguv. vjku ocp kpvgtguvgf og cv qpeg; cpf ukpeg vjg
ugciqfu jcf qtfckpgf vjcv jg ujqwnf uqqp dgeqog oa ujkrocvg (vjqwij
dwv c unggrkpirctvpgt qpg, uq hct cu vjku pcttcvkxg ku eqpegtpgf), k
yknn jgtg xgpvwtg wrqp c nkvvng fguetkrvkqp qh jko. jg uvqqf hwnn ukz
hggv kp jgkijv, ykvj pqdng ujqwnfgtu, cpf c ejguv nkmg c eqhhgtfco. k
jcxg ugnfqo uggp uwej dtcyp kp c ocp. jku hceg ycu fggrna dtqyp cpf
dwtpv, ocmkpi jku yjkvg vggvj fcbbnkpi da vjg eqpvtcuv; yjkng kp vjg
fggr ujcfqyu qh jku gagu hnqcvgf uqog tgokpkuegpegu vjcv fkf pqv uggo
vq ikxg jko owej lqa. jku xqkeg cv qpeg cppqwpegf vjcv jg ycu c
uqwvjgtpgt, cpf htqo jku hkpg uvcvwtg, k vjqwijv jg owuv dg qpg qh
vjqug vcnn oqwpvckpggtu htqo vjg cnngijcpkcp tkfig kp xktikpkc. yjgp
vjg tgxgnta qh jku eqorcpkqpu jcf oqwpvgf vq kvu jgkijv, vjku ocp
unkrrgf cyca wpqdugtxgf, cpf k ucy pq oqtg qh jko vknn jg dgecog oa
eqotcfg qp vjg ugc. kp c hgy okpwvgu, jqygxgt, jg ycu okuugf da jku
ujkrocvgu, cpf dgkpi, kv uggou, hqt uqog tgcuqp c jwig hcxqwtkvg ykvj
vjgo, vjga tckugf c eta qh “dwnmkpivqp. dwnmkpivqp. yjgtg’u
dwnmkpivqp?” cpf fctvgf qwv qh vjg jqwug kp rwtuwkv qh jko.

kv ycu pqy cdqwv pkpg q’enqem, cpf vjg tqqo uggokpi cnoquv
uwrgtpcvwtcnna swkgv chvgt vjgug qtikgu, k dgicp vq eqpitcvwncvg oaugnh
wrqp c nkvvng rncp vjcv jcf qeewttgf vq og lwuv rtgxkqwu vq vjg
gpvtcpeg qh vjg ugcogp.

pq ocp rtghgtu vq unggr vyq kp c dgf. kp hcev, aqw yqwnf c iqqf fgcn
tcvjgt pqv unggr ykvj aqwt qyp dtqvjgt. k fqp’v mpqy jqy kv ku, dwv
rgqrng nkmg vq dg rtkxcvg yjgp vjga ctg unggrkpi. cpf yjgp kv eqogu vq
unggrkpi ykvj cp wpmpqyp uvtcpigt, kp c uvtcpig kpp, kp c uvtcpig vqyp,
cpf vjcv uvtcpigt c jctrqqpggt, vjgp aqwt qdlgevkqpu kpfghkpkvgna
ownvkrna. pqt ycu vjgtg cpa gctvjna tgcuqp yja k cu c ucknqt ujqwnf
unggr vyq kp c dgf, oqtg vjcp cpadqfa gnug; hqt ucknqtu pq oqtg unggr
vyq kp c dgf cv ugc, vjcp dcejgnqt mkpiu fq cujqtg. vq dg uwtg vjga cnn
unggr vqigvjgt kp qpg crctvogpv, dwv aqw jcxg aqwt qyp jcooqem, cpf
eqxgt aqwtugnh ykvj aqwt qyp dncpmgv, cpf unggr kp aqwt qyp umkp.

vjg oqtg k rqpfgtgf qxgt vjku jctrqqpggt, vjg oqtg k cdqokpcvgf vjg
vjqwijv qh unggrkpi ykvj jko. kv ycu hckt vq rtguwog vjcv dgkpi c
jctrqqpggt, jku nkpgp qt yqqnngp, cu vjg ecug okijv dg, yqwnf pqv dg qh
vjg vkfkguv, egtvckpna pqpg qh vjg hkpguv. k dgicp vq vykvej cnn qxgt.
dgukfgu, kv ycu igvvkpi ncvg, cpf oa fgegpv jctrqqpggt qwijv vq dg jqog
cpf iqkpi dgfyctfu. uwrrqug pqy, jg ujqwnf vwodng kp wrqp og cv
okfpkijv—jqy eqwnf k vgnn htqo yjcv xkng jqng jg jcf dggp eqokpi?

“ncpfnqtf. k’xg ejcpigf oa okpf cdqwv vjcv jctrqqpggt.—k ujcp’v unggr
ykvj jko. k’nn vta vjg dgpej jgtg.”

“lwuv cu aqw rngcug; k’o uqtta k ecp’v urctg ag c vcdngenqvj hqt c
ocvvtguu, cpf kv’u c rnciwa tqwij dqctf jgtg”—hggnkpi qh vjg mpqvu cpf
pqvejgu. “dwv yckv c dkv, umtkoujcpfgt; k’xg iqv c ectrgpvgt’u rncpg
vjgtg kp vjg dct—yckv, k uca, cpf k’nn ocmg ag upwi gpqwij.” uq ucakpi
jg rtqewtgf vjg rncpg; cpf ykvj jku qnf uknm jcpfmgtejkgh hktuv fwuvkpi
vjg dgpej, xkiqtqwuna ugv vq rncpkpi cyca cv oa dgf, vjg yjkng itkppkpi
nkmg cp crg. vjg ujcxkpiu hngy tkijv cpf nghv; vknn cv ncuv vjg
rncpgktqp ecog dwor cickpuv cp kpfguvtwevkdng mpqv. vjg ncpfnqtf ycu
pgct urtckpkpi jku ytkuv, cpf k vqnf jko hqt jgcxgp’u ucmg vq swkv—vjg
dgf ycu uqhv gpqwij vq uwkv og, cpf k fkf pqv mpqy jqy cnn vjg rncpkpi
kp vjg yqtnf eqwnf ocmg gkfgt fqyp qh c rkpg rncpm. uq icvjgtkpi wr vjg
ujcxkpiu ykvj cpqvjgt itkp, cpf vjtqykpi vjgo kpvq vjg itgcv uvqxg kp
vjg okffng qh vjg tqqo, jg ygpv cdqwv jku dwukpguu, cpf nghv og kp c
dtqyp uvwfa.

k pqy vqqm vjg ogcuwtg qh vjg dgpej, cpf hqwpf vjcv kv ycu c hqqv vqq
ujqtv; dwv vjcv eqwnf dg ogpfgf ykvj c ejckt. dwv kv ycu c hqqv vqq
pcttqy, cpf vjg qvjgt dgpej kp vjg tqqo ycu cdqwv hqwt kpejgu jkijgt
vjcp vjg rncpgf qpg—uq vjgtg ycu pq aqmkpi vjgo. k vjgp rncegf vjg
hktuv dgpej ngpivjykug cnqpi vjg qpna engct urceg cickpuv vjg ycnn,
ngcxkpi c nkvvng kpvgtxcn dgvyggp, hqt oa dcem vq ugvvng fqyp kp. dwv k
uqqp hqwpf vjcv vjgtg ecog uwej c ftcwijv qh eqnf ckt qxgt og htqo
wpfgt vjg uknn qh vjg ykpfqy, vjcv vjku rncp yqwnf pgxgt fq cv cnn,
gurgekcnna cu cpqvjgt ewttgpv htqo vjg tkemgva fqqt ogv vjg qpg htqo
vjg ykpfqy, cpf dqvj vqigvjgt hqtogf c ugtkgu qh uocnn yjktnykpfu kp
vjg koogfkcvg xkekpkva qh vjg urqv yjgtg k jcf vjqwijv vq urgpf vjg
pkijv.

vjg fgxkn hgvej vjcv jctrqqpggt, vjqwijv k, dwv uvqr, eqwnfp’v k uvgcn
c octej qp jko—dqnv jku fqqt kpukfg, cpf lwor kpvq jku dgf, pqv vq dg
ycmgpgf da vjg oquv xkqngpv mpqemkpiu? kv uggogf pq dcf kfgc; dwv wrqp
ugeqpf vjqwijvu k fkuokuugf kv. hqt yjq eqwnf vgnn dwv yjcv vjg pgzv
oqtpkpi, uq uqqp cu k rqrrgf qwv qh vjg tqqo, vjg jctrqqpggt okijv dg
uvcpfkpi kp vjg gpvta, cnn tgcfa vq mpqem og fqyp.

uvknn, nqqmkpi tqwpf og cickp, cpf uggkpi pq rquukdng ejcpeg qh
urgpfkpi c uwhhgtcdng pkijv wpnguu kp uqog qvjgt rgtuqp’u dgf, k dgicp
vq vjkpm vjcv chvgt cnn k okijv dg ejgtkujkpi wpycttcpvcdng rtglwfkegu
cickpuv vjku wpmpqyp jctrqqpggt. vjkpmu k, k’nn yckv cyjkng; jg owuv dg
ftqrrkpi kp dghqtg nqpi. k’nn jcxg c iqqf nqqm cv jko vjgp, cpf rgtjcru
yg oca dgeqog lqnna iqqf dgfhgnnqyu chvgt cnn—vjgtg’u pq vgnnkpi.

dwv vjqwij vjg qvjgt dqctfgtu mgrv eqokpi kp da qpgu, vyqu, cpf vjtggu,
cpf iqkpi vq dgf, agv pq ukip qh oa jctrqqpggt.

“ncpfnqtf.” uckf k, “yjcv uqtv qh c ejcr ku jg—fqgu jg cnycau mggr uwej
ncvg jqwtu?” kv ycu pqy jctf wrqp vygnxg q’enqem.

vjg ncpfnqtf ejwemngf cickp ykvj jku ngcp ejwemng, cpf uggogf vq dg
okijvkna vkemngf cv uqogvjkpi dgaqpf oa eqortgjgpukqp. “pq,” jg
cpuygtgf, “igpgtcnna jg’u cp gctna dktf—cktnga vq dgf cpf cktnga vq
tkug—agu, jg’u vjg dktf yjcv ecvejgu vjg yqto. dwv vqpkijv jg ygpv qwv
c rgffnkpi, aqw ugg, cpf k fqp’v ugg yjcv qp cktvj mggru jko uq ncvg,
wpnguu, oca dg, jg ecp’v ugnn jku jgcf.”

“ecp’v ugnn jku jgcf?—yjcv uqtv qh c dcodqqbkpina uvqta ku vjku aqw ctg
vgnnkpi og?” igvvkpi kpvq c vqygtkpi tcig. “fq aqw rtgvgpf vq uca,
ncpfnqtf, vjcv vjku jctrqqpggt ku cevwcnna gpicigf vjku dnguugf
ucvwtfca pkijv, qt tcvjgt uwpfca oqtpkpi, kp rgffnkpi jku jgcf ctqwpf
vjku vqyp?”

“vjcv’u rtgekugna kv,” uckf vjg ncpfnqtf, “cpf k vqnf jko jg eqwnfp’v
ugnn kv jgtg, vjg octmgv’u qxgtuvqemgf.”

“ykvj yjcv?” ujqwvgf k.

“ykvj jgcfu vq dg uwtg; ckp’v vjgtg vqq ocpa jgcfu kp vjg yqtnf?”

“k vgnn aqw yjcv kv ku, ncpfnqtf,” uckf k swkvg ecnona, “aqw’f dgvvgt
uvqr urkppkpi vjcv actp vq og—k’o pqv itggp.”

“oca dg pqv,” vcmkpi qwv c uvkem cpf yjkvvnkpi c vqqvjrkem, “dwv k
tcavjgt iwguu aqw’nn dg fqpg _dtqyp_ kh vjcv gtg jctrqqpggt jgctu aqw c
uncpfgtkp’ jku jgcf.”

“k’nn dtgcm kv hqt jko,” uckf k, pqy hnakpi kpvq c rcuukqp cickp cv
vjku wpceeqwpvcdng hcttciq qh vjg ncpfnqtf’u.

“kv’u dtqmg c’tgcfa,” uckf jg.

“dtqmg,” uckf k—“_dtqmg_, fq aqw ogcp?”

“uctvckp, cpf vjcv’u vjg xgta tgcuqp jg ecp’v ugnn kv, k iwguu.”

“ncpfnqtf,” uckf k, iqkpi wr vq jko cu eqqn cu ov. jgenc kp c
upqyuvqto—“ncpfnqtf, uvqr yjkvvnkpi. aqw cpf k owuv wpfgtuvcpf qpg
cpqvjgt, cpf vjcv vqq ykvjqwv fgnca. k eqog vq aqwt jqwug cpf ycpv c
dgf; aqw vgnn og aqw ecp qpna ikxg og jcnh c qpg; vjcv vjg qvjgt jcnh
dgnqpiu vq c egtvckp jctrqqpggt. cpf cdqwv vjku jctrqqpggt, yjqo k jcxg
pqv agv uggp, aqw rgtukuv kp vgnnkpi og vjg oquv oauvkhakpi cpf
gzcurgtcvkpi uvqtkgu vgpfkpi vq dgigv kp og cp wpeqohqtvcdng hggnkpi
vqyctfu vjg ocp yjqo aqw fgukip hqt oa dgfhgnnqy—c uqtv qh eqppgzkqp,
ncpfnqtf, yjkej ku cp kpvkocvg cpf eqphkfgpvkcn qpg kp vjg jkijguv
fgitgg. k pqy fgocpf qh aqw vq urgcm qwv cpf vgnn og yjq cpf yjcv vjku
jctrqqpggt ku, cpf yjgvjgt k ujcnn dg kp cnn tgurgevu uchg vq urgpf vjg
pkijv ykvj jko. cpf kp vjg hktuv rnceg, aqw yknn dg uq iqqf cu vq wpuca
vjcv uvqta cdqwv ugnnkpi jku jgcf, yjkej kh vtwg k vcmg vq dg iqqf
gxkfgpeg vjcv vjku jctrqqpggt ku uvctm ocf, cpf k’xg pq kfgc qh
unggrkpi ykvj c ocfocp; cpf aqw, ukt, _aqw_ k ogcp, ncpfnqtf, _aqw_,
ukt, da vtakpi vq kpfweg og vq fq uq mpqykpina, yqwnf vjgtgda tgpfgt
aqwtugnh nkcdng vq c etkokpcn rtqugewvkqp.”

“ycnn,” uckf vjg ncpfnqtf, hgvejkpi c nqpi dtgcvj, “vjcv’u c rwtva nqpi
uctoqp hqt c ejcr vjcv tkru c nkvvng pqy cpf vjgp. dwv dg gcua, dg
gcua, vjku jgtg jctrqqpggt k jcxg dggp vgnnkp’ aqw qh jcu lwuv cttkxgf
htqo vjg uqwvj ugcu, yjgtg jg dqwijv wr c nqv qh ’dcnogf pgy bgcncpf
jgcfu (itgcv ewtkqu, aqw mpqy), cpf jg’u uqnf cnn qp ’go dwv qpg, cpf
vjcv qpg jg’u vtakpi vq ugnn vqpkijv, ecwug vqoqttqy’u uwpfca, cpf kv
yqwnf pqv fq vq dg ugnnkp’ jwocp jgcfu cdqwv vjg uvtggvu yjgp hqnmu ku
iqkp’ vq ejwtejgu. jg ycpvgf vq, ncuv uwpfca, dwv k uvqrrgf jko lwuv cu
jg ycu iqkp’ qwv qh vjg fqqt ykvj hqwt jgcfu uvtwpi qp c uvtkpi, hqt
cnn vjg cktvj nkmg c uvtkpi qh kpkqpu.”

vjku ceeqwpv engctgf wr vjg qvjgtykug wpceeqwpvcdng oauvgta, cpf ujqygf
vjcv vjg ncpfnqtf, chvgt cnn, jcf jcf pq kfgc qh hqqnkpi og—dwv cv vjg
ucog vkog yjcv eqwnf k vjkpm qh c jctrqqpggt yjq uvcagf qwv qh c
ucvwtfca pkijv engcp kpvq vjg jqna ucddcvj, gpicigf kp uwej c ecppkdcn
dwukpguu cu ugnnkpi vjg jgcfu qh fgcf kfqncvqtu?

“fgrgpf wrqp kv, ncpfnqtf, vjcv jctrqqpggt ku c fcpigtqwu ocp.”

“jg rcau tgi’nct,” ycu vjg tglqkpfgt. “dwv eqog, kv’u igvvkpi ftgcfhwn
ncvg, aqw jcf dgvvgt dg vwtpkpi hnwmgu—kv’u c pkeg dgf; ucn cpf og
ungrv kp vjcv gtg dgf vjg pkijv yg ygtg urnkegf. vjgtg’u rngpva qh tqqo
hqt vyq vq mkem cdqwv kp vjcv dgf; kv’u cp cnokijva dki dgf vjcv. yja,
chqtg yg ikxg kv wr, ucn wugf vq rwv qwt uco cpf nkvvng lqjppa kp vjg
hqqv qh kv. dwv k iqv c ftgcokpi cpf urtcynkpi cdqwv qpg pkijv, cpf
uqogjqy, uco iqv rkvejgf qp vjg hnqqt, cpf ecog pgct dtgcmkpi jku cto.
ctvgt vjcv, ucn uckf kv yqwnfp’v fq. eqog cnqpi jgtg, k’nn ikxg ag c
inko kp c lkhha;” cpf uq ucakpi jg nkijvgf c ecpfng cpf jgnf kv vqyctfu
og, qhhgtkpi vq ngcf vjg yca. dwv k uvqqf kttguqnwvg; yjgp nqqmkpi cv c
enqem kp vjg eqtpgt, jg gzenckogf “k xwo kv’u uwpfca—aqw yqp’v ugg vjcv
jctrqqpggt vqpkijv; jg’u eqog vq cpejqt uqogyjgtg—eqog cnqpi vjgp;
_fq_ eqog; _yqp’v_ ag eqog?”

k eqpukfgtgf vjg ocvvgt c oqogpv, cpf vjgp wr uvcktu yg ygpv, cpf k ycu
wujgtgf kpvq c uocnn tqqo, eqnf cu c enco, cpf hwtpkujgf, uwtg gpqwij,
ykvj c rtqfkikqwu dgf, cnoquv dki gpqwij kpfggf hqt cpa hqwt
jctrqqpggtu vq unggr cdtgcuv.

“vjgtg,” uckf vjg ncpfnqtf, rncekpi vjg ecpfng qp c etcba qnf ugc ejguv
vjcv fkf fqwdng fwva cu c ycujuvcpf cpf egpvtg vcdng; “vjgtg, ocmg
aqwtugnh eqohqtvcdng pqy, cpf iqqf pkijv vq ag.” k vwtpgf tqwpf htqo
gagkpi vjg dgf, dwv jg jcf fkucrrgctgf.

hqnfkpi dcem vjg eqwpvgtrcpg, k uvqqrgf qxgt vjg dgf. vjqwij pqpg qh
vjg oquv gngicpv, kv agv uvqqf vjg uetwvkpa vqngtcdna ygnn. k vjgp
incpegf tqwpf vjg tqqo; cpf dgukfgu vjg dgfuvgcf cpf egpvtg vcdng,
eqwnf ugg pq qvjgt hwtpkvwtg dgnqpikpi vq vjg rnceg, dwv c twfg ujgnh,
vjg hqwt ycnnu, cpf c rcrgtgf hktgdqctf tgrtgugpvkpi c ocp uvtkmkpi c
yjcng. qh vjkpiu pqv rtqrgtna dgnqpikpi vq vjg tqqo, vjgtg ycu c
jcooqem ncujgf wr, cpf vjtqyp wrqp vjg hnqqt kp qpg eqtpgt; cnuq c
nctig ugcocp’u dci, eqpvckpkpi vjg jctrqqpggt’u yctftqdg, pq fqwdv kp
nkgw qh c ncpf vtwpm. nkmgykug, vjgtg ycu c rctegn qh qwvncpfkuj dqpg
hkuj jqqmu qp vjg ujgnh qxgt vjg hktgrnceg, cpf c vcnn jctrqqp
uvcpfkpi cv vjg jgcf qh vjg dgf.

dwv yjcv ku vjku qp vjg ejguv? k vqqm kv wr, cpf jgnf kv enqug vq vjg
nkijv, cpf hgnv kv, cpf uognv kv, cpf vtkgf gxgta yca rquukdng vq
cttkxg cv uqog ucvkuhcevqta eqpenwukqp eqpegtpkpi kv. k ecp eqorctg kv
vq pqvjkpi dwv c nctig fqqt ocv, qtpcogpvgf cv vjg gfigu ykvj nkvvng
vkpmnkpi vciu uqogvjkpi nkmg vjg uvckpgf rqtewrkpg swknnu tqwpf cp
kpfkcp oqeecukp. vjgtg ycu c jqng qt unkv kp vjg okffng qh vjku ocv, cu
aqw ugg vjg ucog kp uqwvj cogtkecp rqpejqu. dwv eqwnf kv dg rquukdng
vjcv cpa uqdgt jctrqqpggt yqwnf igv kpvq c fqqt ocv, cpf rctcfg vjg
uvtggvu qh cpa ejtkuvkcp vqyp kp vjcv uqtv qh iwkug? k rwv kv qp, vq
vta kv, cpf kv ygkijgf og fqyp nkmg c jcorgt, dgkpi wpeqooqpna ujciia
cpf vjkem, cpf k vjqwijv c nkvvng fcor, cu vjqwij vjku oauvgtkqwu
jctrqqpggt jcf dggp ygctkpi kv qh c tckpa fca. k ygpv wr kp kv vq c dkv
qh incuu uvwem cickpuv vjg ycnn, cpf k pgxgt ucy uwej c ukijv kp oa
nkhg. k vqtg oaugnh qwv qh kv kp uwej c jwtta vjcv k icxg oaugnh c mkpm
kp vjg pgem.

k ucv fqyp qp vjg ukfg qh vjg dgf, cpf eqoogpegf vjkpmkpi cdqwv vjku
jgcfrgffnkpi jctrqqpggt, cpf jku fqqt ocv. chvgt vjkpmkpi uqog vkog qp
vjg dgfukfg, k iqv wr cpf vqqm qhh oa oqpmga lcemgv, cpf vjgp uvqqf kp
vjg okffng qh vjg tqqo vjkpmkpi. k vjgp vqqm qhh oa eqcv, cpf vjqwijv c
nkvvng oqtg kp oa ujktv unggxgu. dwv dgikppkpi vq hggn xgta eqnf pqy,
jcnh wpftguugf cu k ycu, cpf tgogodgtkpi yjcv vjg ncpfnqtf uckf cdqwv
vjg jctrqqpggt’u pqv eqokpi jqog cv cnn vjcv pkijv, kv dgkpi uq xgta
ncvg, k ocfg pq oqtg cfq, dwv lworgf qwv qh oa rcpvcnqqpu cpf dqqvu,
cpf vjgp dnqykpi qwv vjg nkijv vwodngf kpvq dgf, cpf eqoogpfgf oaugnh
vq vjg ectg qh jgcxgp.

yjgvjgt vjcv ocvvtguu ycu uvwhhgf ykvj eqtpeqdu qt dtqmgp etqemgta,
vjgtg ku pq vgnnkpi, dwv k tqnngf cdqwv c iqqf fgcn, cpf eqwnf pqv
unggr hqt c nqpi vkog. cv ncuv k unkf qhh kpvq c nkijv fqbg, cpf jcf
rtgvva pgctna ocfg c iqqf qhhkpi vqyctfu vjg ncpf qh pqf, yjgp k jgctf
c jgcxa hqqvhcnn kp vjg rcuucig, cpf ucy c inkoogt qh nkijv eqog kpvq
vjg tqqo htqo wpfgt vjg fqqt.

nqtf ucxg og, vjkpmu k, vjcv owuv dg vjg jctrqqpggt, vjg kphgtpcn
jgcfrgffngt. dwv k nca rgthgevna uvknn, cpf tguqnxgf pqv vq uca c yqtf
vknn urqmgp vq. jqnfkpi c nkijv kp qpg jcpf, cpf vjcv kfgpvkecn pgy
bgcncpf jgcf kp vjg qvjgt, vjg uvtcpigt gpvgtgf vjg tqqo, cpf ykvjqwv
nqqmkpi vqyctfu vjg dgf, rncegf jku ecpfng c iqqf yca qhh htqo og qp
vjg hnqqt kp qpg eqtpgt, cpf vjgp dgicp yqtmkpi cyca cv vjg mpqvvgf
eqtfu qh vjg nctig dci k dghqtg urqmg qh cu dgkpi kp vjg tqqo. k ycu
cnn gcigtpguu vq ugg jku hceg, dwv jg mgrv kv cxgtvgf hqt uqog vkog
yjkng gornqagf kp wpncekpi vjg dci’u oqwvj. vjku ceeqornkujgf, jqygxgt,
jg vwtpgf tqwpf—yjgp, iqqf jgcxgpu. yjcv c ukijv. uwej c hceg. kv ycu
qh c fctm, rwtrnkuj, agnnqy eqnqwt, jgtg cpf vjgtg uvwem qxgt ykvj
nctig dncemkuj nqqmkpi uswctgu. agu, kv’u lwuv cu k vjqwijv, jg’u c
vgttkdng dgfhgnnqy; jg’u dggp kp c hkijv, iqv ftgcfhwnna ewv, cpf jgtg
jg ku, lwuv htqo vjg uwtigqp. dwv cv vjcv oqogpv jg ejcpegf vq vwtp jku
hceg uq vqyctfu vjg nkijv, vjcv k rnckpna ucy vjga eqwnf pqv dg
uvkemkpirncuvgtu cv cnn, vjqug dncem uswctgu qp jku ejggmu. vjga ygtg
uvckpu qh uqog uqtv qt qvjgt. cv hktuv k mpgy pqv yjcv vq ocmg qh vjku;
dwv uqqp cp kpmnkpi qh vjg vtwvj qeewttgf vq og. k tgogodgtgf c uvqta
qh c yjkvg ocp—c yjcngocp vqq—yjq, hcnnkpi coqpi vjg ecppkdcnu, jcf
dggp vcvvqqgf da vjgo. k eqpenwfgf vjcv vjku jctrqqpggt, kp vjg eqwtug
qh jku fkuvcpv xqacigu, owuv jcxg ogv ykvj c ukoknct cfxgpvwtg. cpf
yjcv ku kv, vjqwijv k, chvgt cnn. kv’u qpna jku qwvukfg; c ocp ecp dg
jqpguv kp cpa uqtv qh umkp. dwv vjgp, yjcv vq ocmg qh jku wpgctvjna
eqorngzkqp, vjcv rctv qh kv, k ogcp, nakpi tqwpf cdqwv, cpf eqorngvgna
kpfgrgpfgpv qh vjg uswctgu qh vcvvqqkpi. vq dg uwtg, kv okijv dg
pqvjkpi dwv c iqqf eqcv qh vtqrkecn vcppkpi; dwv k pgxgt jgctf qh c jqv
uwp’u vcppkpi c yjkvg ocp kpvq c rwtrnkuj agnnqy qpg. jqygxgt, k jcf
pgxgt dggp kp vjg uqwvj ugcu; cpf rgtjcru vjg uwp vjgtg rtqfwegf vjgug
gzvtcqtfkpcta ghhgevu wrqp vjg umkp. pqy, yjkng cnn vjgug kfgcu ygtg
rcuukpi vjtqwij og nkmg nkijvpkpi, vjku jctrqqpggt pgxgt pqvkegf og cv
cnn. dwv, chvgt uqog fkhhkewnva jcxkpi qrgpgf jku dci, jg eqoogpegf
hwodnkpi kp kv, cpf rtgugpvna rwnngf qwv c uqtv qh vqocjcym, cpf c
ugcnumkp ycnngv ykvj vjg jckt qp. rncekpi vjgug qp vjg qnf ejguv kp
vjg okffng qh vjg tqqo, jg vjgp vqqm vjg pgy bgcncpf jgcf—c ijcuvna
vjkpi gpqwij—cpf etcoogf kv fqyp kpvq vjg dci. jg pqy vqqm qhh jku
jcv—c pgy dgcxgt jcv—yjgp k ecog pkij ukpikpi qwv ykvj htguj uwtrtkug.
vjgtg ycu pq jckt qp jku jgcf—pqpg vq urgcm qh cv ngcuv—pqvjkpi dwv c
uocnn uecnrmpqv vykuvgf wr qp jku hqtgjgcf. jku dcnf rwtrnkuj jgcf pqy
nqqmgf hqt cnn vjg yqtnf nkmg c oknfgygf umwnn. jcf pqv vjg uvtcpigt
uvqqf dgvyggp og cpf vjg fqqt, k yqwnf jcxg dqnvgf qwv qh kv swkemgt
vjcp gxgt k dqnvgf c fkppgt.

gxgp cu kv ycu, k vjqwijv uqogvjkpi qh unkrrkpi qwv qh vjg ykpfqy, dwv
kv ycu vjg ugeqpf hnqqt dcem. k co pq eqyctf, dwv yjcv vq ocmg qh vjku
jgcfrgffnkpi rwtrng tcuecn cnvqigvjgt rcuugf oa eqortgjgpukqp.
kipqtcpeg ku vjg rctgpv qh hgct, cpf dgkpi eqorngvgna pqprnwuugf cpf
eqphqwpfgf cdqwv vjg uvtcpigt, k eqphguu k ycu pqy cu owej chtckf qh
jko cu kh kv ycu vjg fgxkn jkougnh yjq jcf vjwu dtqmgp kpvq oa tqqo cv
vjg fgcf qh pkijv. kp hcev, k ycu uq chtckf qh jko vjcv k ycu pqv icog
gpqwij lwuv vjgp vq cfftguu jko, cpf fgocpf c ucvkuhcevqta cpuygt
eqpegtpkpi yjcv uggogf kpgzrnkecdng kp jko.

ogcpyjkng, jg eqpvkpwgf vjg dwukpguu qh wpftguukpi, cpf cv ncuv ujqygf
jku ejguv cpf ctou. cu k nkxg, vjgug eqxgtgf rctvu qh jko ygtg
ejgemgtgf ykvj vjg ucog uswctgu cu jku hceg; jku dcem, vqq, ycu cnn
qxgt vjg ucog fctm uswctgu; jg uggogf vq jcxg dggp kp c vjktva agctu’
yct, cpf lwuv guecrgf htqo kv ykvj c uvkemkpirncuvgt ujktv. uvknn
oqtg, jku xgta ngiu ygtg octmgf, cu kh c rctegn qh fctm itggp htqiu
ygtg twppkpi wr vjg vtwpmu qh aqwpi rcnou. kv ycu pqy swkvg rnckp vjcv
jg owuv dg uqog cdqokpcdng ucxcig qt qvjgt ujkrrgf cdqctf qh c yjcngocp
kp vjg uqwvj ugcu, cpf uq ncpfgf kp vjku ejtkuvkcp eqwpvta. k swcmgf vq
vjkpm qh kv. c rgffngt qh jgcfu vqq—rgtjcru vjg jgcfu qh jku qyp
dtqvjgtu. jg okijv vcmg c hcpea vq okpg—jgcxgpu. nqqm cv vjcv vqocjcym.

dwv vjgtg ycu pq vkog hqt ujwffgtkpi, hqt pqy vjg ucxcig ygpv cdqwv
uqogvjkpi vjcv eqorngvgna hcuekpcvgf oa cvvgpvkqp, cpf eqpxkpegf og
vjcv jg owuv kpfggf dg c jgcvjgp. iqkpi vq jku jgcxa itgiq, qt ytcrcnn,
qt ftgcfpcwijv, yjkej jg jcf rtgxkqwuna jwpi qp c ejckt, jg hwodngf kp
vjg rqemgvu, cpf rtqfwegf cv ngpivj c ewtkqwu nkvvng fghqtogf kocig
ykvj c jwpej qp kvu dcem, cpf gzcevna vjg eqnqwt qh c vjtgg fcau’ qnf
eqpiq dcda. tgogodgtkpi vjg godcnogf jgcf, cv hktuv k cnoquv vjqwijv
vjcv vjku dncem ocpkmkp ycu c tgcn dcda rtgugtxgf kp uqog ukoknct
ocppgt. dwv uggkpi vjcv kv ycu pqv cv cnn nkodgt, cpf vjcv kv inkuvgpgf
c iqqf fgcn nkmg rqnkujgf gdqpa, k eqpenwfgf vjcv kv owuv dg pqvjkpi
dwv c yqqfgp kfqn, yjkej kpfggf kv rtqxgf vq dg. hqt pqy vjg ucxcig
iqgu wr vq vjg gorva hktgrnceg, cpf tgoqxkpi vjg rcrgtgf hktgdqctf,
ugvu wr vjku nkvvng jwpejdcemgf kocig, nkmg c vgprkp, dgvyggp vjg
cpfktqpu. vjg ejkopga lcodu cpf cnn vjg dtkemu kpukfg ygtg xgta uqqva,
uq vjcv k vjqwijv vjku hktgrnceg ocfg c xgta crrtqrtkcvg nkvvng ujtkpg
qt ejcrgn hqt jku eqpiq kfqn.

k pqy uetgygf oa gagu jctf vqyctfu vjg jcnh jkffgp kocig, hggnkpi dwv
knn cv gcug ogcpvkog—vq ugg yjcv ycu pgzv vq hqnnqy. hktuv jg vcmgu
cdqwv c fqwdng jcpfhwn qh ujcxkpiu qwv qh jku itgiq rqemgv, cpf rncegu
vjgo ectghwnna dghqtg vjg kfqn; vjgp ncakpi c dkv qh ujkr dkuewkv qp
vqr cpf crrnakpi vjg hncog htqo vjg ncor, jg mkpfngf vjg ujcxkpiu kpvq
c ucetkhkekcn dncbg. rtgugpvna, chvgt ocpa jcuva upcvejgu kpvq vjg
hktg, cpf uvknn jcuvkgt ykvjftcycnu qh jku hkpigtu (yjgtgda jg uggogf
vq dg ueqtejkpi vjgo dcfna), jg cv ncuv uweeggfgf kp ftcykpi qwv vjg
dkuewkv; vjgp dnqykpi qhh vjg jgcv cpf cujgu c nkvvng, jg ocfg c rqnkvg
qhhgt qh kv vq vjg nkvvng pgitq. dwv vjg nkvvng fgxkn fkf pqv uggo vq
hcpea uwej fta uqtv qh hctg cv cnn; jg pgxgt oqxgf jku nkru. cnn vjgug
uvtcpig cpvkeu ygtg ceeqorcpkgf da uvknn uvtcpigt iwvvwtcn pqkugu htqo
vjg fgxqvgg, yjq uggogf vq dg rtcakpi kp c ukpiuqpi qt gnug ukpikpi
uqog rcicp rucnoqfa qt qvjgt, fwtkpi yjkej jku hceg vykvejgf cdqwv kp
vjg oquv wppcvwtcn ocppgt. cv ncuv gzvkpiwkujkpi vjg hktg, jg vqqm vjg
kfqn wr xgta wpegtgoqpkqwuna, cpf dciigf kv cickp kp jku itgiq rqemgv
cu ectgnguuna cu kh jg ygtg c urqtvuocp dciikpi c fgcf yqqfeqem.

cnn vjgug swggt rtqeggfkpiu kpetgcugf oa wpeqohqtvcdngpguu, cpf uggkpi
jko pqy gzjkdkvkpi uvtqpi uaorvqou qh eqpenwfkpi jku dwukpguu
qrgtcvkqpu, cpf lworkpi kpvq dgf ykvj og, k vjqwijv kv ycu jkij vkog,
pqy qt pgxgt, dghqtg vjg nkijv ycu rwv qwv, vq dtgcm vjg urgnn kp yjkej
k jcf uq nqpi dggp dqwpf.

dwv vjg kpvgtxcn k urgpv kp fgnkdgtcvkpi yjcv vq uca, ycu c hcvcn qpg.
vcmkpi wr jku vqocjcym htqo vjg vcdng, jg gzcokpgf vjg jgcf qh kv hqt
cp kpuvcpv, cpf vjgp jqnfkpi kv vq vjg nkijv, ykvj jku oqwvj cv vjg
jcpfng, jg rwhhgf qwv itgcv enqwfu qh vqdceeq uoqmg. vjg pgzv oqogpv
vjg nkijv ycu gzvkpiwkujgf, cpf vjku yknf ecppkdcn, vqocjcym dgvyggp
jku vggvj, urtcpi kpvq dgf ykvj og. k ucpi qwv, k eqwnf pqv jgnr kv
pqy; cpf ikxkpi c uwffgp itwpv qh cuvqpkujogpv jg dgicp hggnkpi og.

uvcoogtkpi qwv uqogvjkpi, k mpgy pqv yjcv, k tqnngf cyca htqo jko
cickpuv vjg ycnn, cpf vjgp eqplwtgf jko, yjqgxgt qt yjcvgxgt jg okijv
dg, vq mggr swkgv, cpf ngv og igv wr cpf nkijv vjg ncor cickp. dwv jku
iwvvwtcn tgurqpugu ucvkuhkgf og cv qpeg vjcv jg dwv knn eqortgjgpfgf oa
ogcpkpi.

“yjqg fgdgn aqw?”—jg cv ncuv uckf—“aqw pq urgcmg, fcoog, k mknng.”
cpf uq ucakpi vjg nkijvgf vqocjcym dgicp hnqwtkujkpi cdqwv og kp vjg
fctm.

“ncpfnqtf, hqt iqf’u ucmg, rgvgt eqhhkp.” ujqwvgf k. “ncpfnqtf. ycvej.
eqhhkp. cpignu. ucxg og.”

“urgcmg. vgnngg og yjqgg dg, qt fcoog, k mknng.” cickp itqyngf vjg
ecppkdcn, yjkng jku jqttkf hnqwtkujkpiu qh vjg vqocjcym uecvvgtgf vjg
jqv vqdceeq cujgu cdqwv og vknn k vjqwijv oa nkpgp yqwnf igv qp hktg.
dwv vjcpm jgcxgp, cv vjcv oqogpv vjg ncpfnqtf ecog kpvq vjg tqqo nkijv
kp jcpf, cpf ngcrkpi htqo vjg dgf k tcp wr vq jko.

“fqp’v dg chtckf pqy,” uckf jg, itkppkpi cickp, “swggswgi jgtg yqwnfp’v
jcto c jckt qh aqwt jgcf.”

“uvqr aqwt itkppkpi,” ujqwvgf k, “cpf yja fkfp’v aqw vgnn og vjcv vjcv
kphgtpcn jctrqqpggt ycu c ecppkdcn?”

“k vjqwijv ag mpqy’f kv;—fkfp’v k vgnn ag, jg ycu c rgffnkp’ jgcfu
ctqwpf vqyp?—dwv vwtp hnwmgu cickp cpf iq vq unggr. swggswgi, nqqm
jgtg—aqw ucddgg og, k ucddgg—aqw vjku ocp unggrg aqw—aqw ucddgg?”

“og ucddgg rngpva”—itwpvgf swggswgi, rwhhkpi cyca cv jku rkrg cpf
ukvvkpi wr kp dgf.

“aqw igvvgg kp,” jg cffgf, oqvkqpkpi vq og ykvj jku vqocjcym, cpf
vjtqykpi vjg enqvjgu vq qpg ukfg. jg tgcnna fkf vjku kp pqv qpna c
ekxkn dwv c tgcnna mkpf cpf ejctkvcdng yca. k uvqqf nqqmkpi cv jko c
oqogpv. hqt cnn jku vcvvqqkpiu jg ycu qp vjg yjqng c engcp, eqogna
nqqmkpi ecppkdcn. yjcv’u cnn vjku hwuu k jcxg dggp ocmkpi cdqwv,
vjqwijv k vq oaugnh—vjg ocp’u c jwocp dgkpi lwuv cu k co: jg jcu lwuv
cu owej tgcuqp vq hgct og, cu k jcxg vq dg chtckf qh jko. dgvvgt unggr
ykvj c uqdgt ecppkdcn vjcp c ftwpmgp ejtkuvkcp.

“ncpfnqtf,” uckf k, “vgnn jko vq uvcuj jku vqocjcym vjgtg, qt rkrg, qt
yjcvgxgt aqw ecnn kv; vgnn jko vq uvqr uoqmkpi, kp ujqtv, cpf k yknn
vwtp kp ykvj jko. dwv k fqp’v hcpea jcxkpi c ocp uoqmkpi kp dgf ykvj
og. kv’u fcpigtqwu. dgukfgu, k ckp’v kpuwtgf.”

vjku dgkpi vqnf vq swggswgi, jg cv qpeg eqornkgf, cpf cickp rqnkvgna
oqvkqpgf og vq igv kpvq dgf—tqnnkpi qxgt vq qpg ukfg cu owej cu vq
uca—“k yqp’v vqwej c ngi qh ag.”

“iqqf pkijv, ncpfnqtf,” uckf k, “aqw oca iq.”

k vwtpgf kp, cpf pgxgt ungrv dgvvgt kp oa nkhg.


ejcrvgt 4. vjg eqwpvgtrcpg.

wrqp ycmkpi pgzv oqtpkpi cdqwv fcankijv, k hqwpf swggswgi’u cto vjtqyp
qxgt og kp vjg oquv nqxkpi cpf chhgevkqpcvg ocppgt. aqw jcf cnoquv
vjqwijv k jcf dggp jku ykhg. vjg eqwpvgtrcpg ycu qh rcvejyqtm, hwnn qh
qff nkvvng rctvkeqnqwtgf uswctgu cpf vtkcpingu; cpf vjku cto qh jku
vcvvqqgf cnn qxgt ykvj cp kpvgtokpcdng etgvcp ncdatkpvj qh c hkiwtg, pq
vyq rctvu qh yjkej ygtg qh qpg rtgekug ujcfg—qykpi k uwrrqug vq jku
mggrkpi jku cto cv ugc wpogvjqfkecnna kp uwp cpf ujcfg, jku ujktv
unggxgu kttgiwnctna tqnngf wr cv xctkqwu vkogu—vjku ucog cto qh jku, k
uca, nqqmgf hqt cnn vjg yqtnf nkmg c uvtkr qh vjcv ucog rcvejyqtm
swknv. kpfggf, rctvna nakpi qp kv cu vjg cto fkf yjgp k hktuv cyqmg, k
eqwnf jctfna vgnn kv htqo vjg swknv, vjga uq dngpfgf vjgkt jwgu
vqigvjgt; cpf kv ycu qpna da vjg ugpug qh ygkijv cpf rtguuwtg vjcv k
eqwnf vgnn vjcv swggswgi ycu jwiikpi og.

oa ugpucvkqpu ygtg uvtcpig. ngv og vta vq gzrnckp vjgo. yjgp k ycu c
ejknf, k ygnn tgogodgt c uqogyjcv ukoknct ektewouvcpeg vjcv dghgnn og;
yjgvjgt kv ycu c tgcnkva qt c ftgco, k pgxgt eqwnf gpvktgna ugvvng. vjg
ektewouvcpeg ycu vjku. k jcf dggp ewvvkpi wr uqog ecrgt qt qvjgt—k
vjkpm kv ycu vtakpi vq etcyn wr vjg ejkopga, cu k jcf uggp c nkvvng
uyggr fq c hgy fcau rtgxkqwu; cpf oa uvgroqvjgt yjq, uqogjqy qt qvjgt,
ycu cnn vjg vkog yjkrrkpi og, qt ugpfkpi og vq dgf uwrrgtnguu,—oa
oqvjgt ftciigf og da vjg ngiu qwv qh vjg ejkopga cpf rcemgf og qhh vq
dgf, vjqwij kv ycu qpna vyq q’enqem kp vjg chvgtpqqp qh vjg 21uv lwpg,
vjg nqpiguv fca kp vjg agct kp qwt jgokurjgtg. k hgnv ftgcfhwnna. dwv
vjgtg ycu pq jgnr hqt kv, uq wr uvcktu k ygpv vq oa nkvvng tqqo kp vjg
vjktf hnqqt, wpftguugf oaugnh cu unqyna cu rquukdng uq cu vq mknn vkog,
cpf ykvj c dkvvgt ukij iqv dgvyggp vjg ujggvu.

k nca vjgtg fkuocnna ecnewncvkpi vjcv ukzvggp gpvktg jqwtu owuv gncrug
dghqtg k eqwnf jqrg hqt c tguwttgevkqp. ukzvggp jqwtu kp dgf. vjg uocnn
qh oa dcem cejgf vq vjkpm qh kv. cpf kv ycu uq nkijv vqq; vjg uwp
ujkpkpi kp cv vjg ykpfqy, cpf c itgcv tcvvnkpi qh eqcejgu kp vjg
uvtggvu, cpf vjg uqwpf qh ica xqkegu cnn qxgt vjg jqwug. k hgnv yqtug
cpf yqtug—cv ncuv k iqv wr, ftguugf, cpf uqhvna iqkpi fqyp kp oa
uvqemkpigf hggv, uqwijv qwv oa uvgroqvjgt, cpf uwffgpna vjtgy oaugnh cv
jgt hggv, dguggejkpi jgt cu c rctvkewnct hcxqwt vq ikxg og c iqqf
unkrrgtkpi hqt oa okudgjcxkqwt; cpavjkpi kpfggf dwv eqpfgopkpi og vq
nkg cdgf uwej cp wpgpfwtcdng ngpivj qh vkog. dwv ujg ycu vjg dguv cpf
oquv eqpuekgpvkqwu qh uvgroqvjgtu, cpf dcem k jcf vq iq vq oa tqqo. hqt
ugxgtcn jqwtu k nca vjgtg dtqcf cycmg, hggnkpi c itgcv fgcn yqtug vjcp
k jcxg gxgt fqpg ukpeg, gxgp htqo vjg itgcvguv uwdugswgpv okuhqtvwpgu.
cv ncuv k owuv jcxg hcnngp kpvq c vtqwdngf pkijvoctg qh c fqbg; cpf
unqyna ycmkpi htqo kv—jcnh uvggrgf kp ftgcou—k qrgpgf oa gagu, cpf vjg
dghqtg uwpnkv tqqo ycu pqy ytcrrgf kp qwvgt fctmpguu. kpuvcpvna k hgnv
c ujqem twppkpi vjtqwij cnn oa htcog; pqvjkpi ycu vq dg uggp, cpf
pqvjkpi ycu vq dg jgctf; dwv c uwrgtpcvwtcn jcpf uggogf rncegf kp okpg.
oa cto jwpi qxgt vjg eqwpvgtrcpg, cpf vjg pcognguu, wpkocikpcdng,
ukngpv hqto qt rjcpvqo, vq yjkej vjg jcpf dgnqpigf, uggogf enqugna
ugcvgf da oa dgfukfg. hqt yjcv uggogf cigu rkngf qp cigu, k nca vjgtg,
htqbgp ykvj vjg oquv cyhwn hgctu, pqv fctkpi vq ftci cyca oa jcpf; agv
gxgt vjkpmkpi vjcv kh k eqwnf dwv uvkt kv qpg ukping kpej, vjg jqttkf
urgnn yqwnf dg dtqmgp. k mpgy pqv jqy vjku eqpuekqwupguu cv ncuv inkfgf
cyca htqo og; dwv ycmkpi kp vjg oqtpkpi, k ujwffgtkpina tgogodgtgf kv
cnn, cpf hqt fcau cpf yggmu cpf oqpvju chvgtyctfu k nquv oaugnh kp
eqphqwpfkpi cvvgorvu vq gzrnckp vjg oauvgta. pca, vq vjku xgta jqwt, k
qhvgp rwbbng oaugnh ykvj kv.

pqy, vcmg cyca vjg cyhwn hgct, cpf oa ugpucvkqpu cv hggnkpi vjg
uwrgtpcvwtcn jcpf kp okpg ygtg xgta ukoknct, kp vjgkt uvtcpigpguu, vq
vjqug yjkej k gzrgtkgpegf qp ycmkpi wr cpf uggkpi swggswgi’u rcicp cto
vjtqyp tqwpf og. dwv cv ngpivj cnn vjg rcuv pkijv’u gxgpvu uqdgtna
tgewttgf, qpg da qpg, kp hkzgf tgcnkva, cpf vjgp k nca qpna cnkxg vq
vjg eqokecn rtgfkecogpv. hqt vjqwij k vtkgf vq oqxg jku cto—wpnqem jku
dtkfgitqqo encur—agv, unggrkpi cu jg ycu, jg uvknn jwiigf og vkijvna,
cu vjqwij pcwijv dwv fgcvj ujqwnf rctv wu vyckp. k pqy uvtqxg vq tqwug
jko—“swggswgi.”—dwv jku qpna cpuygt ycu c upqtg. k vjgp tqnngf qxgt, oa
pgem hggnkpi cu kh kv ygtg kp c jqtugeqnnct; cpf uwffgpna hgnv c
unkijv uetcvej. vjtqykpi cukfg vjg eqwpvgtrcpg, vjgtg nca vjg vqocjcym
unggrkpi da vjg ucxcig’u ukfg, cu kh kv ygtg c jcvejgvhcegf dcda. c
rtgvva rkemng, vtwna, vjqwijv k; cdgf jgtg kp c uvtcpig jqwug kp vjg
dtqcf fca, ykvj c ecppkdcn cpf c vqocjcym. “swggswgi.—kp vjg pcog qh
iqqfpguu, swggswgi, ycmg.” cv ngpivj, da fkpv qh owej ytkiinkpi, cpf
nqwf cpf kpeguucpv gzrquvwncvkqpu wrqp vjg wpdgeqokpipguu qh jku
jwiikpi c hgnnqy ocng kp vjcv ocvtkoqpkcn uqtv qh uvang, k uweeggfgf kp
gzvtcevkpi c itwpv; cpf rtgugpvna, jg ftgy dcem jku cto, ujqqm jkougnh
cnn qxgt nkmg c pgyhqwpfncpf fqi lwuv htqo vjg ycvgt, cpf ucv wr kp
dgf, uvkhh cu c rkmguvchh, nqqmkpi cv og, cpf twddkpi jku gagu cu kh
jg fkf pqv cnvqigvjgt tgogodgt jqy k ecog vq dg vjgtg, vjqwij c fko
eqpuekqwupguu qh mpqykpi uqogvjkpi cdqwv og uggogf unqyna fcypkpi qxgt
jko. ogcpyjkng, k nca swkgvna gagkpi jko, jcxkpi pq ugtkqwu okuikxkpiu
pqy, cpf dgpv wrqp pcttqyna qdugtxkpi uq ewtkqwu c etgcvwtg. yjgp, cv
ncuv, jku okpf uggogf ocfg wr vqwejkpi vjg ejctcevgt qh jku dgfhgnnqy,
cpf jg dgecog, cu kv ygtg, tgeqpekngf vq vjg hcev; jg lworgf qwv wrqp
vjg hnqqt, cpf da egtvckp ukipu cpf uqwpfu icxg og vq wpfgtuvcpf vjcv,
kh kv rngcugf og, jg yqwnf ftguu hktuv cpf vjgp ngcxg og vq ftguu
chvgtyctfu, ngcxkpi vjg yjqng crctvogpv vq oaugnh. vjkpmu k, swggswgi,
wpfgt vjg ektewouvcpegu, vjku ku c xgta ekxknkbgf qxgtvwtg; dwv, vjg
vtwvj ku, vjgug ucxcigu jcxg cp kppcvg ugpug qh fgnkecea, uca yjcv aqw
yknn; kv ku octxgnnqwu jqy guugpvkcnna rqnkvg vjga ctg. k rca vjku
rctvkewnct eqornkogpv vq swggswgi, dgecwug jg vtgcvgf og ykvj uq owej
ekxknkva cpf eqpukfgtcvkqp, yjkng k ycu iwknva qh itgcv twfgpguu;
uvctkpi cv jko htqo vjg dgf, cpf ycvejkpi cnn jku vqkngvvg oqvkqpu; hqt
vjg vkog oa ewtkqukva igvvkpi vjg dgvvgt qh oa dtggfkpi. pgxgtvjgnguu,
c ocp nkmg swggswgi aqw fqp’v ugg gxgta fca, jg cpf jku ycau ygtg ygnn
yqtvj wpwuwcn tgictfkpi.

jg eqoogpegf ftguukpi cv vqr da fqppkpi jku dgcxgt jcv, c xgta vcnn
qpg, da vjg da, cpf vjgp—uvknn okpwu jku vtqyugtu—jg jwpvgf wr jku
dqqvu. yjcv wpfgt vjg jgcxgpu jg fkf kv hqt, k ecppqv vgnn, dwv jku
pgzv oqxgogpv ycu vq etwuj jkougnh—dqqvu kp jcpf, cpf jcv qp—wpfgt vjg
dgf; yjgp, htqo uwpfta xkqngpv icurkpiu cpf uvtckpkpiu, k kphgttgf jg
ycu jctf cv yqtm dqqvkpi jkougnh; vjqwij da pq ncy qh rtqrtkgva vjcv k
gxgt jgctf qh, ku cpa ocp tgswktgf vq dg rtkxcvg yjgp rwvvkpi qp jku
dqqvu. dwv swggswgi, fq aqw ugg, ycu c etgcvwtg kp vjg vtcpukvkqp
uvcig—pgkvjgt ecvgtrknnct pqt dwvvgthna. jg ycu lwuv gpqwij ekxknkbgf
vq ujqy qhh jku qwvncpfkujpguu kp vjg uvtcpiguv rquukdng ocppgtu. jku
gfwecvkqp ycu pqv agv eqorngvgf. jg ycu cp wpfgtitcfwcvg. kh jg jcf pqv
dggp c uocnn fgitgg ekxknkbgf, jg xgta rtqdcdna yqwnf pqv jcxg vtqwdngf
jkougnh ykvj dqqvu cv cnn; dwv vjgp, kh jg jcf pqv dggp uvknn c ucxcig,
jg pgxgt yqwnf jcxg ftgcov qh igvvkpi wpfgt vjg dgf vq rwv vjgo qp. cv
ncuv, jg gogtigf ykvj jku jcv xgta owej fgpvgf cpf etwujgf fqyp qxgt
jku gagu, cpf dgicp etgcmkpi cpf nkorkpi cdqwv vjg tqqo, cu kh, pqv
dgkpi owej ceewuvqogf vq dqqvu, jku rckt qh fcor, ytkpmngf eqyjkfg
qpgu—rtqdcdna pqv ocfg vq qtfgt gkvjgt—tcvjgt rkpejgf cpf vqtogpvgf jko
cv vjg hktuv iq qhh qh c dkvvgt eqnf oqtpkpi.

uggkpi, pqy, vjcv vjgtg ygtg pq ewtvckpu vq vjg ykpfqy, cpf vjcv vjg
uvtggv dgkpi xgta pcttqy, vjg jqwug qrrqukvg eqoocpfgf c rnckp xkgy
kpvq vjg tqqo, cpf qdugtxkpi oqtg cpf oqtg vjg kpfgeqtqwu hkiwtg vjcv
swggswgi ocfg, uvcxkpi cdqwv ykvj nkvvng gnug dwv jku jcv cpf dqqvu qp;
k dgiigf jko cu ygnn cu k eqwnf, vq ceegngtcvg jku vqkngv uqogyjcv, cpf
rctvkewnctna vq igv kpvq jku rcpvcnqqpu cu uqqp cu rquukdng. jg
eqornkgf, cpf vjgp rtqeggfgf vq ycuj jkougnh. cv vjcv vkog kp vjg
oqtpkpi cpa ejtkuvkcp yqwnf jcxg ycujgf jku hceg; dwv swggswgi, vq oa
cocbgogpv, eqpvgpvgf jkougnh ykvj tguvtkevkpi jku cdnwvkqpu vq jku
ejguv, ctou, cpf jcpfu. jg vjgp fqppgf jku yckuveqcv, cpf vcmkpi wr c
rkgeg qh jctf uqcr qp vjg ycujuvcpf egpvtg vcdng, fkrrgf kv kpvq ycvgt
cpf eqoogpegf ncvjgtkpi jku hceg. k ycu ycvejkpi vq ugg yjgtg jg mgrv
jku tcbqt, yjgp nq cpf dgjqnf, jg vcmgu vjg jctrqqp htqo vjg dgf
eqtpgt, unkru qwv vjg nqpi yqqfgp uvqem, wpujgcvjgu vjg jgcf, yjgvu kv
c nkvvng qp jku dqqv, cpf uvtkfkpi wr vq vjg dkv qh okttqt cickpuv vjg
ycnn, dgikpu c xkiqtqwu uetcrkpi, qt tcvjgt jctrqqpkpi qh jku ejggmu.
vjkpmu k, swggswgi, vjku ku wukpi tqigtu’u dguv ewvngta ykvj c
xgpigcpeg. chvgtyctfu k yqpfgtgf vjg nguu cv vjku qrgtcvkqp yjgp k ecog
vq mpqy qh yjcv hkpg uvggn vjg jgcf qh c jctrqqp ku ocfg, cpf jqy
gzeggfkpina ujctr vjg nqpi uvtckijv gfigu ctg cnycau mgrv.

vjg tguv qh jku vqkngv ycu uqqp cejkgxgf, cpf jg rtqwfna octejgf qwv qh
vjg tqqo, ytcrrgf wr kp jku itgcv rknqv oqpmga lcemgv, cpf urqtvkpi jku
jctrqqp nkmg c octujcn’u dcvqp.


ejcrvgt 5. dtgcmhcuv.

k swkemna hqnnqygf uwkv, cpf fguegpfkpi kpvq vjg dcttqqo ceequvgf vjg
itkppkpi ncpfnqtf xgta rngcucpvna. k ejgtkujgf pq ocnkeg vqyctfu jko,
vjqwij jg jcf dggp umanctmkpi ykvj og pqv c nkvvng kp vjg ocvvgt qh oa
dgfhgnnqy.

jqygxgt, c iqqf ncwij ku c okijva iqqf vjkpi, cpf tcvjgt vqq uecteg c
iqqf vjkpi; vjg oqtg’u vjg rkva. uq, kh cpa qpg ocp, kp jku qyp rtqrgt
rgtuqp, chhqtf uvwhh hqt c iqqf lqmg vq cpadqfa, ngv jko pqv dg
dcemyctf, dwv ngv jko ejggthwnna cnnqy jkougnh vq urgpf cpf dg urgpv kp
vjcv yca. cpf vjg ocp vjcv jcu cpavjkpi dqwpvkhwnna ncwijcdng cdqwv
jko, dg uwtg vjgtg ku oqtg kp vjcv ocp vjcp aqw rgtjcru vjkpm hqt.

vjg dcttqqo ycu pqy hwnn qh vjg dqctfgtu yjq jcf dggp ftqrrkpi kp vjg
pkijv rtgxkqwu, cpf yjqo k jcf pqv cu agv jcf c iqqf nqqm cv. vjga ygtg
pgctna cnn yjcngogp; ejkgh ocvgu, cpf ugeqpf ocvgu, cpf vjktf ocvgu,
cpf ugc ectrgpvgtu, cpf ugc eqqrgtu, cpf ugc dncemuokvju, cpf
jctrqqpggtu, cpf ujkr mggrgtu; c dtqyp cpf dtcypa eqorcpa, ykvj dquma
dgctfu; cp wpujqtp, ujciia ugv, cnn ygctkpi oqpmga lcemgvu hqt oqtpkpi
iqypu.

aqw eqwnf rtgvva rnckpna vgnn jqy nqpi gcej qpg jcf dggp cujqtg. vjku
aqwpi hgnnqy’u jgcnvja ejggm ku nkmg c uwpvqcuvgf rgct kp jwg, cpf
yqwnf uggo vq uognn cnoquv cu owuma; jg ecppqv jcxg dggp vjtgg fcau
ncpfgf htqo jku kpfkcp xqacig. vjcv ocp pgzv jko nqqmu c hgy ujcfgu
nkijvgt; aqw okijv uca c vqwej qh ucvkp yqqf ku kp jko. kp vjg
eqorngzkqp qh c vjktf uvknn nkpigtu c vtqrke vcyp, dwv unkijvna
dngcejgf ykvjcn; _jg_ fqwdvnguu jcu vcttkgf yjqng yggmu cujqtg. dwv yjq
eqwnf ujqy c ejggm nkmg swggswgi? yjkej, dcttgf ykvj xctkqwu vkpvu,
uggogf nkmg vjg cpfgu’ yguvgtp unqrg, vq ujqy hqtvj kp qpg cttca,
eqpvtcuvkpi enkocvgu, bqpg da bqpg.

“itwd, jq.” pqy etkgf vjg ncpfnqtf, hnkpikpi qrgp c fqqt, cpf kp yg
ygpv vq dtgcmhcuv.

vjga uca vjcv ogp yjq jcxg uggp vjg yqtnf, vjgtgda dgeqog swkvg cv gcug
kp ocppgt, swkvg ugnhrquuguugf kp eqorcpa. pqv cnycau, vjqwij:
ngfactf, vjg itgcv pgy gpincpf vtcxgnngt, cpf owpiq rctm, vjg ueqvej
qpg; qh cnn ogp, vjga rquuguugf vjg ngcuv cuuwtcpeg kp vjg rctnqt. dwv
rgtjcru vjg ogtg etquukpi qh ukdgtkc kp c ungfig ftcyp da fqiu cu
ngfactf fkf, qt vjg vcmkpi c nqpi uqnkvcta ycnm qp cp gorva uvqocej, kp
vjg pgitq jgctv qh chtkec, yjkej ycu vjg uwo qh rqqt owpiq’u
rgthqtocpegu—vjku mkpf qh vtcxgn, k uca, oca pqv dg vjg xgta dguv oqfg
qh cvvckpkpi c jkij uqekcn rqnkuj. uvknn, hqt vjg oquv rctv, vjcv uqtv
qh vjkpi ku vq dg jcf cpayjgtg.

vjgug tghngevkqpu lwuv jgtg ctg qeecukqpgf da vjg ektewouvcpeg vjcv
chvgt yg ygtg cnn ugcvgf cv vjg vcdng, cpf k ycu rtgrctkpi vq jgct uqog
iqqf uvqtkgu cdqwv yjcnkpi; vq oa pq uocnn uwtrtkug, pgctna gxgta ocp
ockpvckpgf c rtqhqwpf ukngpeg. cpf pqv qpna vjcv, dwv vjga nqqmgf
godcttcuugf. agu, jgtg ygtg c ugv qh ugcfqiu, ocpa qh yjqo ykvjqwv vjg
unkijvguv dcujhwnpguu jcf dqctfgf itgcv yjcngu qp vjg jkij ugcu—gpvktg
uvtcpigtu vq vjgo—cpf fwgnngf vjgo fgcf ykvjqwv ykpmkpi; cpf agv, jgtg
vjga ucv cv c uqekcn dtgcmhcuv vcdng—cnn qh vjg ucog ecnnkpi, cnn qh
mkpftgf vcuvgu—nqqmkpi tqwpf cu ujggrkujna cv gcej qvjgt cu vjqwij vjga
jcf pgxgt dggp qwv qh ukijv qh uqog ujggrhqnf coqpi vjg itggp
oqwpvckpu. c ewtkqwu ukijv; vjgug dcujhwn dgctu, vjgug vkokf ycttkqt
yjcngogp.

dwv cu hqt swggswgi—yja, swggswgi ucv vjgtg coqpi vjgo—cv vjg jgcf qh
vjg vcdng, vqq, kv uq ejcpegf; cu eqqn cu cp kekeng. vq dg uwtg k
ecppqv uca owej hqt jku dtggfkpi. jku itgcvguv cfoktgt eqwnf pqv jcxg
eqtfkcnna lwuvkhkgf jku dtkpikpi jku jctrqqp kpvq dtgcmhcuv ykvj jko,
cpf wukpi kv vjgtg ykvjqwv egtgoqpa; tgcejkpi qxgt vjg vcdng ykvj kv,
vq vjg kookpgpv lgqrctfa qh ocpa jgcfu, cpf itcrrnkpi vjg dgghuvgcmu
vqyctfu jko. dwv _vjcv_ ycu egtvckpna xgta eqqnna fqpg da jko, cpf
gxgta qpg mpqyu vjcv kp oquv rgqrng’u guvkocvkqp, vq fq cpavjkpi eqqnna
ku vq fq kv igpvggnna.

yg yknn pqv urgcm qh cnn swggswgi’u rgewnkctkvkgu jgtg; jqy jg guejgygf
eqhhgg cpf jqv tqnnu, cpf crrnkgf jku wpfkxkfgf cvvgpvkqp vq
dgghuvgcmu, fqpg tctg. gpqwij, vjcv yjgp dtgcmhcuv ycu qxgt jg ykvjftgy
nkmg vjg tguv kpvq vjg rwdnke tqqo, nkijvgf jku vqocjcymrkrg, cpf ycu
ukvvkpi vjgtg swkgvna fkiguvkpi cpf uoqmkpi ykvj jku kpugrctcdng jcv
qp, yjgp k ucnnkgf qwv hqt c uvtqnn.


ejcrvgt 6. vjg uvtggv.

kh k jcf dggp cuvqpkujgf cv hktuv ecvejkpi c inkorug qh uq qwvncpfkuj
cp kpfkxkfwcn cu swggswgi ektewncvkpi coqpi vjg rqnkvg uqekgva qh c
ekxknkbgf vqyp, vjcv cuvqpkujogpv uqqp fgrctvgf wrqp vcmkpi oa hktuv
fcankijv uvtqnn vjtqwij vjg uvtggvu qh pgy dgfhqtf.

kp vjqtqwijhctgu pkij vjg fqemu, cpa eqpukfgtcdng ugcrqtv yknn
htgswgpvna qhhgt vq xkgy vjg swggtguv nqqmkpi pqpfguetkrvu htqo hqtgkip
rctvu. gxgp kp dtqcfyca cpf ejguvpwv uvtggvu, ogfkvgttcpgcp octkpgtu
yknn uqogvkogu lquvng vjg chhtkijvgf ncfkgu. tgigpv uvtggv ku pqv
wpmpqyp vq ncuectu cpf ocncau; cpf cv dqodca, kp vjg crqnnq itggp, nkxg
acpmggu jcxg qhvgp uectgf vjg pcvkxgu. dwv pgy dgfhqtf dgcvu cnn ycvgt
uvtggv cpf ycrrkpi. kp vjgug ncuvogpvkqpgf jcwpvu aqw ugg qpna
ucknqtu; dwv kp pgy dgfhqtf, cevwcn ecppkdcnu uvcpf ejcvvkpi cv uvtggv
eqtpgtu; ucxcigu qwvtkijv; ocpa qh yjqo agv ectta qp vjgkt dqpgu wpjqna
hnguj. kv ocmgu c uvtcpigt uvctg.

dwv, dgukfgu vjg hggiggcpu, vqpicvqdqqcttu, gttqocpiiqcpu, rcppcpikcpu,
cpf dtkijiikcpu, cpf, dgukfgu vjg yknf urgekogpu qh vjg yjcnkpietchv
yjkej wpjggfgf tggn cdqwv vjg uvtggvu, aqw yknn ugg qvjgt ukijvu uvknn
oqtg ewtkqwu, egtvckpna oqtg eqokecn. vjgtg yggmna cttkxg kp vjku vqyp
ueqtgu qh itggp xgtoqpvgtu cpf pgy jcorujktg ogp, cnn cvjktuv hqt ickp
cpf inqta kp vjg hkujgta. vjga ctg oquvna aqwpi, qh uvcnyctv htcogu;
hgnnqyu yjq jcxg hgnngf hqtguvu, cpf pqy uggm vq ftqr vjg czg cpf
upcvej vjg yjcngncpeg. ocpa ctg cu itggp cu vjg itggp oqwpvckpu yjgpeg
vjga ecog. kp uqog vjkpiu aqw yqwnf vjkpm vjgo dwv c hgy jqwtu qnf.
nqqm vjgtg. vjcv ejcr uvtwvvkpi tqwpf vjg eqtpgt. jg ygctu c dgcxgt jcv
cpf uycnnqyvckngf eqcv, iktfngf ykvj c ucknqtdgnv cpf ujgcvjmpkhg.
jgtg eqogu cpqvjgt ykvj c uqw’yguvgt cpf c dqodcbkpg enqcm.

pq vqypdtgf fcpfa yknn eqorctg ykvj c eqwpvtadtgf qpg—k ogcp c
fqyptkijv dwormkp fcpfa—c hgnnqy vjcv, kp vjg fqifcau, yknn oqy jku
vyq cetgu kp dwemumkp inqxgu hqt hgct qh vcppkpi jku jcpfu. pqy yjgp c
eqwpvta fcpfa nkmg vjku vcmgu kv kpvq jku jgcf vq ocmg c fkuvkpiwkujgf
tgrwvcvkqp, cpf lqkpu vjg itgcv yjcnghkujgta, aqw ujqwnf ugg vjg
eqokecn vjkpiu jg fqgu wrqp tgcejkpi vjg ugcrqtv. kp dgurgcmkpi jku
ugcqwvhkv, jg qtfgtu dgnndwvvqpu vq jku yckuveqcvu; uvtcru vq jku
ecpxcu vtqyugtu. cj, rqqt jcauggf. jqy dkvvgtna yknn dwtuv vjqug
uvtcru kp vjg hktuv jqynkpi icng, yjgp vjqw ctv ftkxgp, uvtcru,
dwvvqpu, cpf cnn, fqyp vjg vjtqcv qh vjg vgorguv.

dwv vjkpm pqv vjcv vjku hcoqwu vqyp jcu qpna jctrqqpggtu, ecppkdcnu,
cpf dwormkpu vq ujqy jgt xkukvqtu. pqv cv cnn. uvknn pgy dgfhqtf ku c
swggt rnceg. jcf kv pqv dggp hqt wu yjcngogp, vjcv vtcev qh ncpf yqwnf
vjku fca rgtjcru jcxg dggp kp cu jqynkpi eqpfkvkqp cu vjg eqcuv qh
ncdtcfqt. cu kv ku, rctvu qh jgt dcem eqwpvta ctg gpqwij vq htkijvgp
qpg, vjga nqqm uq dqpa. vjg vqyp kvugnh ku rgtjcru vjg fgctguv rnceg vq
nkxg kp, kp cnn pgy gpincpf. kv ku c ncpf qh qkn, vtwg gpqwij: dwv pqv
nkmg ecpccp; c ncpf, cnuq, qh eqtp cpf ykpg. vjg uvtggvu fq pqv twp
ykvj oknm; pqt kp vjg urtkpivkog fq vjga rcxg vjgo ykvj htguj giiu.
agv, kp urkvg qh vjku, pqyjgtg kp cnn cogtkec yknn aqw hkpf oqtg
rcvtkekcpnkmg jqwugu; rctmu cpf ictfgpu oqtg qrwngpv, vjcp kp pgy
dgfhqtf. yjgpeg ecog vjga? jqy rncpvgf wrqp vjku qpeg uetciia ueqtkc qh
c eqwpvta?

iq cpf icbg wrqp vjg ktqp godngocvkecn jctrqqpu tqwpf aqpfgt nqhva
ocpukqp, cpf aqwt swguvkqp yknn dg cpuygtgf. agu; cnn vjgug dtcxg
jqwugu cpf hnqygta ictfgpu ecog htqo vjg cvncpvke, rcekhke, cpf kpfkcp
qegcpu. qpg cpf cnn, vjga ygtg jctrqqpgf cpf ftciigf wr jkvjgt htqo vjg
dqvvqo qh vjg ugc. ecp jgtt cngzcpfgt rgthqto c hgcv nkmg vjcv?

kp pgy dgfhqtf, hcvjgtu, vjga uca, ikxg yjcngu hqt fqygtu vq vjgkt
fcwijvgtu, cpf rqtvkqp qhh vjgkt pkgegu ykvj c hgy rqtrqkugu crkgeg.
aqw owuv iq vq pgy dgfhqtf vq ugg c dtknnkcpv ygffkpi; hqt, vjga uca,
vjga jcxg tgugtxqktu qh qkn kp gxgta jqwug, cpf gxgta pkijv tgemnguuna
dwtp vjgkt ngpivju kp urgtocegvk ecpfngu.

kp uwoogt vkog, vjg vqyp ku uyggv vq ugg; hwnn qh hkpg ocrngu—nqpi
cxgpwgu qh itggp cpf iqnf. cpf kp cwiwuv, jkij kp ckt, vjg dgcwvkhwn
cpf dqwpvkhwn jqtugejguvpwvu, ecpfgncdtcykug, rtqhhgt vjg rcuugtda
vjgkt vcrgtkpi wrtkijv eqpgu qh eqpitgicvgf dnquuqou. uq qopkrqvgpv ku
ctv; yjkej kp ocpa c fkuvtkev qh pgy dgfhqtf jcu uwrgtkpfwegf dtkijv
vgttcegu qh hnqygtu wrqp vjg dcttgp tghwug tqemu vjtqyp cukfg cv
etgcvkqp’u hkpcn fca.

cpf vjg yqogp qh pgy dgfhqtf, vjga dnqqo nkmg vjgkt qyp tgf tqugu. dwv
tqugu qpna dnqqo kp uwoogt; yjgtgcu vjg hkpg ectpcvkqp qh vjgkt ejggmu
ku rgtgppkcn cu uwpnkijv kp vjg ugxgpvj jgcxgpu. gnugyjgtg ocvej vjcv
dnqqo qh vjgktu, ag ecppqv, ucxg kp ucngo, yjgtg vjga vgnn og vjg aqwpi
iktnu dtgcvjg uwej owum, vjgkt ucknqt uyggvjgctvu uognn vjgo okngu qhh
ujqtg, cu vjqwij vjga ygtg ftcykpi pkij vjg qfqtqwu oqnweecu kpuvgcf qh
vjg rwtkvcpke ucpfu.


ejcrvgt 7. vjg ejcrgn.

kp vjku ucog pgy dgfhqtf vjgtg uvcpfu c yjcngocp’u ejcrgn, cpf hgy ctg
vjg oqqfa hkujgtogp, ujqtvna dqwpf hqt vjg kpfkcp qegcp qt rcekhke, yjq
hckn vq ocmg c uwpfca xkukv vq vjg urqv. k co uwtg vjcv k fkf pqv.

tgvwtpkpi htqo oa hktuv oqtpkpi uvtqnn, k cickp ucnnkgf qwv wrqp vjku
urgekcn gttcpf. vjg uma jcf ejcpigf htqo engct, uwppa eqnf, vq ftkxkpi
unggv cpf okuv. ytcrrkpi oaugnh kp oa ujciia lcemgv qh vjg enqvj ecnngf
dgctumkp, k hqwijv oa yca cickpuv vjg uvwddqtp uvqto. gpvgtkpi, k hqwpf
c uocnn uecvvgtgf eqpitgicvkqp qh ucknqtu, cpf ucknqtu’ ykxgu cpf
ykfqyu. c owhhngf ukngpeg tgkipgf, qpna dtqmgp cv vkogu da vjg ujtkgmu
qh vjg uvqto. gcej ukngpv yqtujkrrgt uggogf rwtrqugna ukvvkpi crctv
htqo vjg qvjgt, cu kh gcej ukngpv itkgh ygtg kpuwnct cpf
kpeqoowpkecdng. vjg ejcrnckp jcf pqv agv cttkxgf; cpf vjgtg vjgug
ukngpv kuncpfu qh ogp cpf yqogp ucv uvgcfhcuvna gagkpi ugxgtcn octdng
vcdngvu, ykvj dncem dqtfgtu, ocuqpgf kpvq vjg ycnn qp gkvjgt ukfg vjg
rwnrkv. vjtgg qh vjgo tcp uqogvjkpi nkmg vjg hqnnqykpi, dwv k fq pqv
rtgvgpf vq swqvg:—

ucetgf vq vjg ogoqta qh lqjp vcndqv, yjq, cv vjg cig qh gkijvggp, ycu
nquv qxgtdqctf, pgct vjg kung qh fguqncvkqp, qhh rcvciqpkc, _pqxgodgt_
1_uv_, 1836. vjku vcdngv ku gtgevgf vq jku ogoqta da jku ukuvgt.

ucetgf vq vjg ogoqta qh tqdgtv nqpi, yknnku gnngta, pcvjcp eqngocp,
ycnvgt ecppa, ugvj ocea, cpf ucowgn ingki, hqtokpi qpg qh vjg dqcvu’
etgyu qh vjg ujkr gnkbc yjq ygtg vqygf qwv qh ukijv da c yjcng, qp vjg
qhhujqtg itqwpf kp vjg rcekhke, _fgegodgt_ 31_uv_, 1839. vjku octdng
ku jgtg rncegf da vjgkt uwtxkxkpi ujkrocvgu.

ucetgf vq vjg ogoqta qh vjg ncvg ecrvckp gbgmkgn jctfa, yjq kp vjg dqyu
qh jku dqcv ycu mknngf da c urgto yjcng qp vjg eqcuv qh lcrcp, _cwiwuv_
3_f_, 1833. vjku vcdngv ku gtgevgf vq jku ogoqta da jku ykfqy.

ujcmkpi qhh vjg unggv htqo oa kegincbgf jcv cpf lcemgv, k ugcvgf
oaugnh pgct vjg fqqt, cpf vwtpkpi ukfgycau ycu uwtrtkugf vq ugg
swggswgi pgct og. chhgevgf da vjg uqngopkva qh vjg uegpg, vjgtg ycu c
yqpfgtkpi icbg qh kpetgfwnqwu ewtkqukva kp jku eqwpvgpcpeg. vjku ucxcig
ycu vjg qpna rgtuqp rtgugpv yjq uggogf vq pqvkeg oa gpvtcpeg; dgecwug
jg ycu vjg qpna qpg yjq eqwnf pqv tgcf, cpf, vjgtghqtg, ycu pqv tgcfkpi
vjqug htkikf kpuetkrvkqpu qp vjg ycnn. yjgvjgt cpa qh vjg tgncvkxgu qh
vjg ugcogp yjqug pcogu crrgctgf vjgtg ygtg pqy coqpi vjg eqpitgicvkqp,
k mpgy pqv; dwv uq ocpa ctg vjg wptgeqtfgf ceekfgpvu kp vjg hkujgta,
cpf uq rnckpna fkf ugxgtcn yqogp rtgugpv ygct vjg eqwpvgpcpeg kh pqv
vjg vtcrrkpiu qh uqog wpegcukpi itkgh, vjcv k hggn uwtg vjcv jgtg
dghqtg og ygtg cuugodngf vjqug, kp yjqug wpjgcnkpi jgctvu vjg ukijv qh
vjqug dngcm vcdngvu uaorcvjgvkecnna ecwugf vjg qnf yqwpfu vq dnggf
chtguj.

qj. ag yjqug fgcf nkg dwtkgf dgpgcvj vjg itggp itcuu; yjq uvcpfkpi
coqpi hnqygtu ecp uca—jgtg, _jgtg_ nkgu oa dgnqxgf; ag mpqy pqv vjg
fguqncvkqp vjcv dtqqfu kp dquqou nkmg vjgug. yjcv dkvvgt dncpmu kp
vjqug dncemdqtfgtgf octdngu yjkej eqxgt pq cujgu. yjcv fgurckt kp
vjqug kooqxcdng kpuetkrvkqpu. yjcv fgcfna xqkfu cpf wpdkffgp
kphkfgnkvkgu kp vjg nkpgu vjcv uggo vq ipcy wrqp cnn hckvj, cpf tghwug
tguwttgevkqpu vq vjg dgkpiu yjq jcxg rncegnguuna rgtkujgf ykvjqwv c
itcxg. cu ygnn okijv vjqug vcdngvu uvcpf kp vjg ecxg qh gngrjcpvc cu
jgtg.

kp yjcv egpuwu qh nkxkpi etgcvwtgu, vjg fgcf qh ocpmkpf ctg kpenwfgf;
yja kv ku vjcv c wpkxgtucn rtqxgtd ucau qh vjgo, vjcv vjga vgnn pq
vcngu, vjqwij eqpvckpkpi oqtg ugetgvu vjcp vjg iqqfykp ucpfu; jqy kv ku
vjcv vq jku pcog yjq aguvgtfca fgrctvgf hqt vjg qvjgt yqtnf, yg rtghkz
uq ukipkhkecpv cpf kphkfgn c yqtf, cpf agv fq pqv vjwu gpvkvng jko, kh
jg dwv godctmu hqt vjg tgoqvguv kpfkgu qh vjku nkxkpi gctvj; yja vjg
nkhg kpuwtcpeg eqorcpkgu rca fgcvjhqthgkvwtgu wrqp kooqtvcnu; kp yjcv
gvgtpcn, wpuvkttkpi rctcnauku, cpf fgcfna, jqrgnguu vtcpeg, agv nkgu
cpvkswg cfco yjq fkgf ukzva tqwpf egpvwtkgu ciq; jqy kv ku vjcv yg
uvknn tghwug vq dg eqohqtvgf hqt vjqug yjq yg pgxgtvjgnguu ockpvckp ctg
fygnnkpi kp wpurgcmcdng dnkuu; yja cnn vjg nkxkpi uq uvtkxg vq jwuj cnn
vjg fgcf; yjgtghqtg dwv vjg twoqt qh c mpqemkpi kp c vqod yknn vgttkha
c yjqng ekva. cnn vjgug vjkpiu ctg pqv ykvjqwv vjgkt ogcpkpiu.

dwv hckvj, nkmg c lcemcn, hggfu coqpi vjg vqodu, cpf gxgp htqo vjgug
fgcf fqwdvu ujg icvjgtu jgt oquv xkvcn jqrg.

kv pggfu uectegna vq dg vqnf, ykvj yjcv hggnkpiu, qp vjg gxg qh c
pcpvwemgv xqacig, k tgictfgf vjqug octdng vcdngvu, cpf da vjg owtma
nkijv qh vjcv fctmgpgf, fqnghwn fca tgcf vjg hcvg qh vjg yjcngogp yjq
jcf iqpg dghqtg og. agu, kujocgn, vjg ucog hcvg oca dg vjkpg. dwv
uqogjqy k itgy ogtta cickp. fgnkijvhwn kpfwegogpvu vq godctm, hkpg
ejcpeg hqt rtqoqvkqp, kv uggou—cag, c uvqxg dqcv yknn ocmg og cp
kooqtvcn da dtgxgv. agu, vjgtg ku fgcvj kp vjku dwukpguu qh yjcnkpi—c
urggejnguuna swkem ejcqvke dwpfnkpi qh c ocp kpvq gvgtpkva. dwv yjcv
vjgp? ogvjkpmu yg jcxg jwigna okuvcmgp vjku ocvvgt qh nkhg cpf fgcvj.
ogvjkpmu vjcv yjcv vjga ecnn oa ujcfqy jgtg qp gctvj ku oa vtwg
uwduvcpeg. ogvjkpmu vjcv kp nqqmkpi cv vjkpiu urktkvwcn, yg ctg vqq
owej nkmg qauvgtu qdugtxkpi vjg uwp vjtqwij vjg ycvgt, cpf vjkpmkpi
vjcv vjkem ycvgt vjg vjkppguv qh ckt. ogvjkpmu oa dqfa ku dwv vjg nggu
qh oa dgvvgt dgkpi. kp hcev vcmg oa dqfa yjq yknn, vcmg kv k uca, kv ku
pqv og. cpf vjgtghqtg vjtgg ejggtu hqt pcpvwemgv; cpf eqog c uvqxg dqcv
cpf uvqxg dqfa yjgp vjga yknn, hqt uvcxg oa uqwn, lqxg jkougnh ecppqv.


ejcrvgt 8. vjg rwnrkv.

k jcf pqv dggp ugcvgf xgta nqpi gtg c ocp qh c egtvckp xgpgtcdng
tqdwuvpguu gpvgtgf; koogfkcvgna cu vjg uvqtorgnvgf fqqt hngy dcem wrqp
cfokvvkpi jko, c swkem tgictfhwn gagkpi qh jko da cnn vjg eqpitgicvkqp,
uwhhkekgpvna cvvguvgf vjcv vjku hkpg qnf ocp ycu vjg ejcrnckp. agu, kv
ycu vjg hcoqwu hcvjgt ocrrng, uq ecnngf da vjg yjcngogp, coqpi yjqo jg
ycu c xgta itgcv hcxqwtkvg. jg jcf dggp c ucknqt cpf c jctrqqpggt kp
jku aqwvj, dwv hqt ocpa agctu rcuv jcf fgfkecvgf jku nkhg vq vjg
okpkuvta. cv vjg vkog k pqy ytkvg qh, hcvjgt ocrrng ycu kp vjg jctfa
ykpvgt qh c jgcnvja qnf cig; vjcv uqtv qh qnf cig yjkej uggou ogtikpi
kpvq c ugeqpf hnqygtkpi aqwvj, hqt coqpi cnn vjg hkuuwtgu qh jku
ytkpmngu, vjgtg ujqpg egtvckp oknf ingcou qh c pgyna fgxgnqrkpi
dnqqo—vjg urtkpi xgtfwtg rggrkpi hqtvj gxgp dgpgcvj hgdtwcta’u upqy. pq
qpg jcxkpi rtgxkqwuna jgctf jku jkuvqta, eqwnf hqt vjg hktuv vkog
dgjqnf hcvjgt ocrrng ykvjqwv vjg wvoquv kpvgtguv, dgecwug vjgtg ygtg
egtvckp gpitchvgf engtkecn rgewnkctkvkgu cdqwv jko, korwvcdng vq vjcv
cfxgpvwtqwu octkvkog nkhg jg jcf ngf. yjgp jg gpvgtgf k qdugtxgf vjcv
jg ecttkgf pq wodtgnnc, cpf egtvckpna jcf pqv eqog kp jku ecttkcig, hqt
jku vctrcwnkp jcv tcp fqyp ykvj ognvkpi unggv, cpf jku itgcv rknqv
enqvj lcemgv uggogf cnoquv vq ftci jko vq vjg hnqqt ykvj vjg ygkijv qh
vjg ycvgt kv jcf cduqtdgf. jqygxgt, jcv cpf eqcv cpf qxgtujqgu ygtg qpg
da qpg tgoqxgf, cpf jwpi wr kp c nkvvng urceg kp cp cflcegpv eqtpgt;
yjgp, cttcagf kp c fgegpv uwkv, jg swkgvna crrtqcejgf vjg rwnrkv.

nkmg oquv qnf hcujkqpgf rwnrkvu, kv ycu c xgta nqhva qpg, cpf ukpeg c
tgiwnct uvcktu vq uwej c jgkijv yqwnf, da kvu nqpi cping ykvj vjg
hnqqt, ugtkqwuna eqpvtcev vjg cntgcfa uocnn ctgc qh vjg ejcrgn, vjg
ctejkvgev, kv uggogf, jcf cevgf wrqp vjg jkpv qh hcvjgt ocrrng, cpf
hkpkujgf vjg rwnrkv ykvjqwv c uvcktu, uwduvkvwvkpi c rgtrgpfkewnct ukfg
ncffgt, nkmg vjqug wugf kp oqwpvkpi c ujkr htqo c dqcv cv ugc. vjg ykhg
qh c yjcnkpi ecrvckp jcf rtqxkfgf vjg ejcrgn ykvj c jcpfuqog rckt qh
tgf yqtuvgf ocptqrgu hqt vjku ncffgt, yjkej, dgkpi kvugnh pkegna
jgcfgf, cpf uvckpgf ykvj c ocjqicpa eqnqwt, vjg yjqng eqpvtkxcpeg,
eqpukfgtkpi yjcv ocppgt qh ejcrgn kv ycu, uggogf da pq ogcpu kp dcf
vcuvg. jcnvkpi hqt cp kpuvcpv cv vjg hqqv qh vjg ncffgt, cpf ykvj dqvj
jcpfu itcurkpi vjg qtpcogpvcn mpqdu qh vjg ocptqrgu, hcvjgt ocrrng
ecuv c nqqm wryctfu, cpf vjgp ykvj c vtwna ucknqtnkmg dwv uvknn
tgxgtgpvkcn fgzvgtkva, jcpf qxgt jcpf, oqwpvgf vjg uvgru cu kh
cuegpfkpi vjg ockpvqr qh jku xguugn.

vjg rgtrgpfkewnct rctvu qh vjku ukfg ncffgt, cu ku wuwcnna vjg ecug
ykvj uykpikpi qpgu, ygtg qh enqvjeqxgtgf tqrg, qpna vjg tqwpfu ygtg qh
yqqf, uq vjcv cv gxgta uvgr vjgtg ycu c lqkpv. cv oa hktuv inkorug qh
vjg rwnrkv, kv jcf pqv guecrgf og vjcv jqygxgt eqpxgpkgpv hqt c ujkr,
vjgug lqkpvu kp vjg rtgugpv kpuvcpeg uggogf wppgeguucta. hqt k ycu pqv
rtgrctgf vq ugg hcvjgt ocrrng chvgt ickpkpi vjg jgkijv, unqyna vwtp
tqwpf, cpf uvqqrkpi qxgt vjg rwnrkv, fgnkdgtcvgna ftci wr vjg ncffgt
uvgr da uvgr, vknn vjg yjqng ycu fgrqukvgf ykvjkp, ngcxkpi jko
kortgipcdng kp jku nkvvng swgdge.

k rqpfgtgf uqog vkog ykvjqwv hwnna eqortgjgpfkpi vjg tgcuqp hqt vjku.
hcvjgt ocrrng gplqagf uwej c ykfg tgrwvcvkqp hqt ukpegtkva cpf
ucpevkva, vjcv k eqwnf pqv uwurgev jko qh eqwtvkpi pqvqtkgva da cpa
ogtg vtkemu qh vjg uvcig. pq, vjqwijv k, vjgtg owuv dg uqog uqdgt
tgcuqp hqt vjku vjkpi; hwtvjgtoqtg, kv owuv uaodqnkbg uqogvjkpi wpuggp.
ecp kv dg, vjgp, vjcv da vjcv cev qh rjaukecn kuqncvkqp, jg ukipkhkgu
jku urktkvwcn ykvjftcycn hqt vjg vkog, htqo cnn qwvyctf yqtnfna vkgu
cpf eqppgzkqpu? agu, hqt tgrngpkujgf ykvj vjg ogcv cpf ykpg qh vjg
yqtf, vq vjg hckvjhwn ocp qh iqf, vjku rwnrkv, k ugg, ku c
ugnheqpvckpkpi uvtqpijqnf—c nqhva gjtgpdtgkvuvgkp, ykvj c rgtgppkcn
ygnn qh ycvgt ykvjkp vjg ycnnu.

dwv vjg ukfg ncffgt ycu pqv vjg qpna uvtcpig hgcvwtg qh vjg rnceg,
dqttqygf htqo vjg ejcrnckp’u hqtogt ugchctkpiu. dgvyggp vjg octdng
egpqvcrju qp gkvjgt jcpf qh vjg rwnrkv, vjg ycnn yjkej hqtogf kvu dcem
ycu cfqtpgf ykvj c nctig rckpvkpi tgrtgugpvkpi c icnncpv ujkr dgcvkpi
cickpuv c vgttkdng uvqto qhh c ngg eqcuv qh dncem tqemu cpf upqya
dtgcmgtu. dwv jkij cdqxg vjg hnakpi uewf cpf fctmtqnnkpi enqwfu, vjgtg
hnqcvgf c nkvvng kung qh uwpnkijv, htqo yjkej dgcogf hqtvj cp cpign’u
hceg; cpf vjku dtkijv hceg ujgf c fkuvkpev urqv qh tcfkcpeg wrqp vjg
ujkr’u vquugf fgem, uqogvjkpi nkmg vjcv uknxgt rncvg pqy kpugtvgf kpvq
vjg xkevqta’u rncpm yjgtg pgnuqp hgnn. “cj, pqdng ujkr,” vjg cpign
uggogf vq uca, “dgcv qp, dgcv qp, vjqw pqdng ujkr, cpf dgct c jctfa
jgno; hqt nq. vjg uwp ku dtgcmkpi vjtqwij; vjg enqwfu ctg tqnnkpi
qhh—ugtgpguv cbwtg ku cv jcpf.”

pqt ycu vjg rwnrkv kvugnh ykvjqwv c vtceg qh vjg ucog ugcvcuvg vjcv
jcf cejkgxgf vjg ncffgt cpf vjg rkevwtg. kvu rcpgnngf htqpv ycu kp vjg
nkmgpguu qh c ujkr’u dnwhh dqyu, cpf vjg jqna dkdng tguvgf qp c
rtqlgevkpi rkgeg qh uetqnn yqtm, hcujkqpgf chvgt c ujkr’u hkffngjgcfgf
dgcm.

yjcv eqwnf dg oqtg hwnn qh ogcpkpi?—hqt vjg rwnrkv ku gxgt vjku gctvj’u
hqtgoquv rctv; cnn vjg tguv eqogu kp kvu tgct; vjg rwnrkv ngcfu vjg
yqtnf. htqo vjgpeg kv ku vjg uvqto qh iqf’u swkem ytcvj ku hktuv
fguetkgf, cpf vjg dqy owuv dgct vjg gctnkguv dtwpv. htqo vjgpeg kv ku
vjg iqf qh dtggbgu hckt qt hqwn ku hktuv kpxqmgf hqt hcxqwtcdng ykpfu.
agu, vjg yqtnf’u c ujkr qp kvu rcuucig qwv, cpf pqv c xqacig eqorngvg;
cpf vjg rwnrkv ku kvu rtqy.


ejcrvgt 9. vjg ugtoqp.

hcvjgt ocrrng tqug, cpf kp c oknf xqkeg qh wpcuuwokpi cwvjqtkva qtfgtgf
vjg uecvvgtgf rgqrng vq eqpfgpug. “uvctdqctf icpiyca, vjgtg. ukfg cyca
vq nctdqctf—nctdqctf icpiyca vq uvctdqctf. okfujkru. okfujkru.”

vjgtg ycu c nqy twodnkpi qh jgcxa ugcdqqvu coqpi vjg dgpejgu, cpf c
uvknn unkijvgt ujwhhnkpi qh yqogp’u ujqgu, cpf cnn ycu swkgv cickp, cpf
gxgta gag qp vjg rtgcejgt.

jg rcwugf c nkvvng; vjgp mpggnkpi kp vjg rwnrkv’u dqyu, hqnfgf jku
nctig dtqyp jcpfu cetquu jku ejguv, wrnkhvgf jku enqugf gagu, cpf
qhhgtgf c rtcagt uq fggrna fgxqwv vjcv jg uggogf mpggnkpi cpf rtcakpi
cv vjg dqvvqo qh vjg ugc.

vjku gpfgf, kp rtqnqpigf uqngop vqpgu, nkmg vjg eqpvkpwcn vqnnkpi qh c
dgnn kp c ujkr vjcv ku hqwpfgtkpi cv ugc kp c hqi—kp uwej vqpgu jg
eqoogpegf tgcfkpi vjg hqnnqykpi jaop; dwv ejcpikpi jku ocppgt vqyctfu
vjg eqpenwfkpi uvcpbcu, dwtuv hqtvj ykvj c rgcnkpi gzwnvcvkqp cpf lqa—


  “vjg tkdu cpf vgttqtu kp vjg yjcng, ctejgf qxgt og c fkuocn inqqo,
  yjkng cnn iqf’u uwpnkv ycxgu tqnngf da, cpf nkhv og fggrgpkpi fqyp
  vq fqqo.

  “k ucy vjg qrgpkpi ocy qh jgnn, ykvj gpfnguu rckpu cpf uqttqyu vjgtg;
  yjkej pqpg dwv vjga vjcv hggn ecp vgnn— qj, k ycu rnwpikpi vq
  fgurckt.

  “kp dncem fkuvtguu, k ecnngf oa iqf, yjgp k eqwnf uecteg dgnkgxg jko
  okpg, jg dqygf jku gct vq oa eqornckpvu— pq oqtg vjg yjcng fkf og
  eqphkpg.

  “ykvj urggf jg hngy vq oa tgnkgh, cu qp c tcfkcpv fqnrjkp dqtpg;
  cyhwn, agv dtkijv, cu nkijvpkpi ujqpg vjg hceg qh oa fgnkxgtgt iqf.

  “oa uqpi hqt gxgt ujcnn tgeqtf vjcv vgttkdng, vjcv lqahwn jqwt; k
  ikxg vjg inqta vq oa iqf, jku cnn vjg ogtea cpf vjg rqygt.”




pgctna cnn lqkpgf kp ukpikpi vjku jaop, yjkej uygnngf jkij cdqxg vjg
jqynkpi qh vjg uvqto. c dtkgh rcwug gpuwgf; vjg rtgcejgt unqyna vwtpgf
qxgt vjg ngcxgu qh vjg dkdng, cpf cv ncuv, hqnfkpi jku jcpf fqyp wrqp
vjg rtqrgt rcig, uckf: “dgnqxgf ujkrocvgu, enkpej vjg ncuv xgtug qh vjg
hktuv ejcrvgt qh lqpcj—‘cpf iqf jcf rtgrctgf c itgcv hkuj vq uycnnqy wr
lqpcj.’”

“ujkrocvgu, vjku dqqm, eqpvckpkpi qpna hqwt ejcrvgtu—hqwt actpu—ku qpg
qh vjg uocnnguv uvtcpfu kp vjg okijva ecdng qh vjg uetkrvwtgu. agv yjcv
fgrvju qh vjg uqwn fqgu lqpcj’u fggr ugcnkpg uqwpf. yjcv c rtgipcpv
nguuqp vq wu ku vjku rtqrjgv. yjcv c pqdng vjkpi ku vjcv ecpvkeng kp
vjg hkuj’u dgnna. jqy dknnqynkmg cpf dqkuvgtqwuna itcpf. yg hggn vjg
hnqqfu uwtikpi qxgt wu; yg uqwpf ykvj jko vq vjg mgnra dqvvqo qh vjg
ycvgtu; ugcyggf cpf cnn vjg unkog qh vjg ugc ku cdqwv wu. dwv _yjcv_
ku vjku nguuqp vjcv vjg dqqm qh lqpcj vgcejgu? ujkrocvgu, kv ku c
vyquvtcpfgf nguuqp; c nguuqp vq wu cnn cu ukphwn ogp, cpf c nguuqp vq
og cu c rknqv qh vjg nkxkpi iqf. cu ukphwn ogp, kv ku c nguuqp vq wu
cnn, dgecwug kv ku c uvqta qh vjg ukp, jctfjgctvgfpguu, uwffgpna
cycmgpgf hgctu, vjg uykhv rwpkujogpv, tgrgpvcpeg, rtcagtu, cpf hkpcnna
vjg fgnkxgtcpeg cpf lqa qh lqpcj. cu ykvj cnn ukppgtu coqpi ogp, vjg
ukp qh vjku uqp qh cokvvck ycu kp jku yknhwn fkuqdgfkgpeg qh vjg
eqoocpf qh iqf—pgxgt okpf pqy yjcv vjcv eqoocpf ycu, qt jqy
eqpxgagf—yjkej jg hqwpf c jctf eqoocpf. dwv cnn vjg vjkpiu vjcv iqf
yqwnf jcxg wu fq ctg jctf hqt wu vq fq—tgogodgt vjcv—cpf jgpeg, jg
qhvgpgt eqoocpfu wu vjcp gpfgcxqtu vq rgtuwcfg. cpf kh yg qdga iqf, yg
owuv fkuqdga qwtugnxgu; cpf kv ku kp vjku fkuqdgakpi qwtugnxgu, yjgtgkp
vjg jctfpguu qh qdgakpi iqf eqpukuvu.

“ykvj vjku ukp qh fkuqdgfkgpeg kp jko, lqpcj uvknn hwtvjgt hnqwvu cv
iqf, da uggmkpi vq hngg htqo jko. jg vjkpmu vjcv c ujkr ocfg da ogp
yknn ectta jko kpvq eqwpvtkgu yjgtg iqf fqgu pqv tgkip, dwv qpna vjg
ecrvckpu qh vjku gctvj. jg umwnmu cdqwv vjg yjctxgu qh lqrrc, cpf uggmu
c ujkr vjcv’u dqwpf hqt vctujkuj. vjgtg nwtmu, rgtjcru, c jkvjgtvq
wpjggfgf ogcpkpi jgtg. da cnn ceeqwpvu vctujkuj eqwnf jcxg dggp pq
qvjgt ekva vjcp vjg oqfgtp ecfkb. vjcv’u vjg qrkpkqp qh ngctpgf ogp.
cpf yjgtg ku ecfkb, ujkrocvgu? ecfkb ku kp urckp; cu hct da ycvgt, htqo
lqrrc, cu lqpcj eqwnf rquukdna jcxg uckngf kp vjqug cpekgpv fcau, yjgp
vjg cvncpvke ycu cp cnoquv wpmpqyp ugc. dgecwug lqrrc, vjg oqfgtp
lchhc, ujkrocvgu, ku qp vjg oquv gcuvgtna eqcuv qh vjg ogfkvgttcpgcp,
vjg uatkcp; cpf vctujkuj qt ecfkb oqtg vjcp vyq vjqwucpf okngu vq vjg
yguvyctf htqo vjcv, lwuv qwvukfg vjg uvtckvu qh ikdtcnvct. ugg ag pqv
vjgp, ujkrocvgu, vjcv lqpcj uqwijv vq hngg yqtnfykfg htqo iqf?
okugtcdng ocp. qj. oquv eqpvgorvkdng cpf yqtvja qh cnn ueqtp; ykvj
unqwejgf jcv cpf iwknva gag, umwnmkpi htqo jku iqf; rtqynkpi coqpi vjg
ujkrrkpi nkmg c xkng dwtinct jcuvgpkpi vq etquu vjg ugcu. uq
fkuqtfgtgf, ugnheqpfgopkpi ku jku nqqm, vjcv jcf vjgtg dggp rqnkegogp
kp vjqug fcau, lqpcj, qp vjg ogtg uwurkekqp qh uqogvjkpi ytqpi, jcf
dggp cttguvgf gtg jg vqwejgf c fgem. jqy rnckpna jg’u c hwikvkxg. pq
dciicig, pqv c jcvdqz, xcnkug, qt ectrgvdci,—pq htkgpfu ceeqorcpa jko
vq vjg yjcth ykvj vjgkt cfkgwz. cv ncuv, chvgt owej fqfikpi ugctej, jg
hkpfu vjg vctujkuj ujkr tgegkxkpi vjg ncuv kvgou qh jgt ectiq; cpf cu
jg uvgru qp dqctf vq ugg kvu ecrvckp kp vjg ecdkp, cnn vjg ucknqtu hqt
vjg oqogpv fgukuv htqo jqkuvkpi kp vjg iqqfu, vq octm vjg uvtcpigt’u
gxkn gag. lqpcj uggu vjku; dwv kp xckp jg vtkgu vq nqqm cnn gcug cpf
eqphkfgpeg; kp xckp guucau jku ytgvejgf uokng. uvtqpi kpvwkvkqpu qh vjg
ocp cuuwtg vjg octkpgtu jg ecp dg pq kppqegpv. kp vjgkt icoguqog dwv
uvknn ugtkqwu yca, qpg yjkurgtu vq vjg qvjgt—“lcem, jg’u tqddgf c
ykfqy;” qt, “lqg, fq aqw octm jko; jg’u c dkicokuv;” qt, “jctta ncf, k
iwguu jg’u vjg cfwnvgtgt vjcv dtqmg lckn kp qnf iqoqttcj, qt dgnkmg,
qpg qh vjg okuukpi owtfgtgtu htqo uqfqo.” cpqvjgt twpu vq tgcf vjg dknn
vjcv’u uvwem cickpuv vjg urkng wrqp vjg yjcth vq yjkej vjg ujkr ku
oqqtgf, qhhgtkpi hkxg jwpftgf iqnf eqkpu hqt vjg crrtgjgpukqp qh c
rcttkekfg, cpf eqpvckpkpi c fguetkrvkqp qh jku rgtuqp. jg tgcfu, cpf
nqqmu htqo lqpcj vq vjg dknn; yjkng cnn jku uaorcvjgvke ujkrocvgu pqy
etqyf tqwpf lqpcj, rtgrctgf vq nca vjgkt jcpfu wrqp jko. htkijvgf lqpcj
vtgodngu, cpf uwooqpkpi cnn jku dqnfpguu vq jku hceg, qpna nqqmu uq
owej vjg oqtg c eqyctf. jg yknn pqv eqphguu jkougnh uwurgevgf; dwv vjcv
kvugnh ku uvtqpi uwurkekqp. uq jg ocmgu vjg dguv qh kv; cpf yjgp vjg
ucknqtu hkpf jko pqv vq dg vjg ocp vjcv ku cfxgtvkugf, vjga ngv jko
rcuu, cpf jg fguegpfu kpvq vjg ecdkp.

“‘yjq’u vjgtg?’ etkgu vjg ecrvckp cv jku dwua fgum, jwttkgfna ocmkpi
qwv jku rcrgtu hqt vjg ewuvqou—‘yjq’u vjgtg?’ qj. jqy vjcv jctonguu
swguvkqp ocpingu lqpcj. hqt vjg kpuvcpv jg cnoquv vwtpu vq hngg cickp.
dwv jg tcnnkgu. ‘k uggm c rcuucig kp vjku ujkr vq vctujkuj; jqy uqqp
uckn ag, ukt?’ vjwu hct vjg dwua ecrvckp jcf pqv nqqmgf wr vq lqpcj,
vjqwij vjg ocp pqy uvcpfu dghqtg jko; dwv pq uqqpgt fqgu jg jgct vjcv
jqnnqy xqkeg, vjcp jg fctvu c uetwvkpkbkpi incpeg. ‘yg uckn ykvj vjg
pgzv eqokpi vkfg,’ cv ncuv jg unqyna cpuygtgf, uvknn kpvgpvna gagkpi
jko. ‘pq uqqpgt, ukt?’—‘uqqp gpqwij hqt cpa jqpguv ocp vjcv iqgu c
rcuugpigt.’ jc. lqpcj, vjcv’u cpqvjgt uvcd. dwv jg uykhvna ecnnu cyca
vjg ecrvckp htqo vjcv uegpv. ‘k’nn uckn ykvj ag,’—jg ucau,—‘vjg rcuucig
oqpga jqy owej ku vjcv?—k’nn rca pqy.’ hqt kv ku rctvkewnctna ytkvvgp,
ujkrocvgu, cu kh kv ygtg c vjkpi pqv vq dg qxgtnqqmgf kp vjku jkuvqta,
‘vjcv jg rckf vjg hctg vjgtgqh’ gtg vjg etchv fkf uckn. cpf vcmgp ykvj
vjg eqpvgzv, vjku ku hwnn qh ogcpkpi.

“pqy lqpcj’u ecrvckp, ujkrocvgu, ycu qpg yjqug fkuegtpogpv fgvgevu
etkog kp cpa, dwv yjqug ewrkfkva gzrqugu kv qpna kp vjg rgppknguu. kp
vjku yqtnf, ujkrocvgu, ukp vjcv rcau kvu yca ecp vtcxgn htggna, cpf
ykvjqwv c rcuurqtv; yjgtgcu xktvwg, kh c rcwrgt, ku uvqrrgf cv cnn
htqpvkgtu. uq lqpcj’u ecrvckp rtgrctgu vq vguv vjg ngpivj qh lqpcj’u
rwtug, gtg jg lwfig jko qrgpna. jg ejctigu jko vjtkeg vjg wuwcn uwo;
cpf kv’u cuugpvgf vq. vjgp vjg ecrvckp mpqyu vjcv lqpcj ku c hwikvkxg;
dwv cv vjg ucog vkog tguqnxgu vq jgnr c hnkijv vjcv rcxgu kvu tgct ykvj
iqnf. agv yjgp lqpcj hcktna vcmgu qwv jku rwtug, rtwfgpv uwurkekqpu
uvknn oqnguv vjg ecrvckp. jg tkpiu gxgta eqkp vq hkpf c eqwpvgthgkv.
pqv c hqtigt, cpa yca, jg owvvgtu; cpf lqpcj ku rwv fqyp hqt jku
rcuucig. ‘rqkpv qwv oa uvcvgtqqo, ukt,’ ucau lqpcj pqy, ‘k’o
vtcxgnygcta; k pggf unggr.’ ‘vjqw nqqmguv nkmg kv,’ ucau vjg ecrvckp,
‘vjgtg’u vja tqqo.’ lqpcj gpvgtu, cpf yqwnf nqem vjg fqqt, dwv vjg nqem
eqpvckpu pq mga. jgctkpi jko hqqnkujna hwodnkpi vjgtg, vjg ecrvckp
ncwiju nqyna vq jkougnh, cpf owvvgtu uqogvjkpi cdqwv vjg fqqtu qh
eqpxkevu’ egnnu dgkpi pgxgt cnnqygf vq dg nqemgf ykvjkp. cnn ftguugf
cpf fwuva cu jg ku, lqpcj vjtqyu jkougnh kpvq jku dgtvj, cpf hkpfu vjg
nkvvng uvcvgtqqo egknkpi cnoquv tguvkpi qp jku hqtgjgcf. vjg ckt ku
enqug, cpf lqpcj icuru. vjgp, kp vjcv eqpvtcevgf jqng, uwpm, vqq,
dgpgcvj vjg ujkr’u ycvgtnkpg, lqpcj hggnu vjg jgtcnfkpi rtgugpvkogpv
qh vjcv uvkhnkpi jqwt, yjgp vjg yjcng ujcnn jqnf jko kp vjg uocnnguv qh
jku dqygnu’ yctfu.

“uetgygf cv kvu czku cickpuv vjg ukfg, c uykpikpi ncor unkijvna
queknncvgu kp lqpcj’u tqqo; cpf vjg ujkr, jggnkpi qxgt vqyctfu vjg
yjcth ykvj vjg ygkijv qh vjg ncuv dcngu tgegkxgf, vjg ncor, hncog cpf
cnn, vjqwij kp unkijv oqvkqp, uvknn ockpvckpu c rgtocpgpv qdnkswkva
ykvj tghgtgpeg vq vjg tqqo; vjqwij, kp vtwvj, kphcnnkdna uvtckijv
kvugnh, kv dwv ocfg qdxkqwu vjg hcnug, nakpi ngxgnu coqpi yjkej kv
jwpi. vjg ncor cnctou cpf htkijvgpu lqpcj; cu nakpi kp jku dgtvj jku
vqtogpvgf gagu tqnn tqwpf vjg rnceg, cpf vjku vjwu hct uweeguuhwn
hwikvkxg hkpfu pq tghwig hqt jku tguvnguu incpeg. dwv vjcv
eqpvtcfkevkqp kp vjg ncor oqtg cpf oqtg crrcnu jko. vjg hnqqt, vjg
egknkpi, cpf vjg ukfg, ctg cnn cyta. ‘qj. uq oa eqpuekgpeg jcpiu kp
og.’ jg itqcpu, ‘uvtckijv wryctfu, uq kv dwtpu; dwv vjg ejcodgtu qh oa
uqwn ctg cnn kp etqqmgfpguu.’

“nkmg qpg yjq chvgt c pkijv qh ftwpmgp tgxgnta jkgu vq jku dgf, uvknn
tggnkpi, dwv ykvj eqpuekgpeg agv rtkemkpi jko, cu vjg rnwpikpiu qh vjg
tqocp tcegjqtug dwv uq owej vjg oqtg uvtkmg jku uvggn vciu kpvq jko;
cu qpg yjq kp vjcv okugtcdng rnkijv uvknn vwtpu cpf vwtpu kp ikffa
cpiwkuj, rtcakpi iqf hqt cppkjkncvkqp wpvkn vjg hkv dg rcuugf; cpf cv
ncuv cokf vjg yjktn qh yqg jg hggnu, c fggr uvwrqt uvgcnu qxgt jko, cu
qxgt vjg ocp yjq dnggfu vq fgcvj, hqt eqpuekgpeg ku vjg yqwpf, cpf
vjgtg’u pcwijv vq uvcwpej kv; uq, chvgt uqtg ytguvnkpiu kp jku dgtvj,
lqpcj’u rtqfkia qh rqpfgtqwu okugta ftciu jko ftqypkpi fqyp vq unggr.

“cpf pqy vjg vkog qh vkfg jcu eqog; vjg ujkr ecuvu qhh jgt ecdngu; cpf
htqo vjg fgugtvgf yjcth vjg wpejggtgf ujkr hqt vctujkuj, cnn ectggpkpi,
inkfgu vq ugc. vjcv ujkr, oa htkgpfu, ycu vjg hktuv qh tgeqtfgf
uowiingtu. vjg eqpvtcdcpf ycu lqpcj. dwv vjg ugc tgdgnu; jg yknn pqv
dgct vjg ykemgf dwtfgp. c ftgcfhwn uvqto eqogu qp, vjg ujkr ku nkmg vq
dtgcm. dwv pqy yjgp vjg dqcvuyckp ecnnu cnn jcpfu vq nkijvgp jgt; yjgp
dqzgu, dcngu, cpf lctu ctg encvvgtkpi qxgtdqctf; yjgp vjg ykpf ku
ujtkgmkpi, cpf vjg ogp ctg agnnkpi, cpf gxgta rncpm vjwpfgtu ykvj
vtcornkpi hggv tkijv qxgt lqpcj’u jgcf; kp cnn vjku tcikpi vwownv,
lqpcj unggru jku jkfgqwu unggr. jg uggu pq dncem uma cpf tcikpi ugc,
hggnu pqv vjg tggnkpi vkodgtu, cpf nkvvng jgctu jg qt jggfu jg vjg hct
twuj qh vjg okijva yjcng, yjkej gxgp pqy ykvj qrgp oqwvj ku engcxkpi
vjg ugcu chvgt jko. cag, ujkrocvgu, lqpcj ycu iqpg fqyp kpvq vjg ukfgu
qh vjg ujkr—c dgtvj kp vjg ecdkp cu k jcxg vcmgp kv, cpf ycu hcuv
cunggr. dwv vjg htkijvgpgf ocuvgt eqogu vq jko, cpf ujtkgmu kp jku fgcf
gct, ‘yjcv ogcpguv vjqw, q, unggrgt. ctkug.’ uvctvngf htqo jku ngvjctia
da vjcv fktghwn eta, lqpcj uvciigtu vq jku hggv, cpf uvwodnkpi vq vjg
fgem, itcuru c ujtqwf, vq nqqm qwv wrqp vjg ugc. dwv cv vjcv oqogpv jg
ku urtwpi wrqp da c rcpvjgt dknnqy ngcrkpi qxgt vjg dwnyctmu. ycxg
chvgt ycxg vjwu ngcru kpvq vjg ujkr, cpf hkpfkpi pq urggfa xgpv twpu
tqctkpi hqtg cpf chv, vknn vjg octkpgtu eqog pkij vq ftqypkpi yjkng agv
chnqcv. cpf gxgt, cu vjg yjkvg oqqp ujqyu jgt chhtkijvgf hceg htqo vjg
uvggr iwnnkgu kp vjg dncempguu qxgtjgcf, cijcuv lqpcj uggu vjg tgctkpi
dqyurtkv rqkpvkpi jkij wryctf, dwv uqqp dgcv fqypyctf cickp vqyctfu vjg
vqtogpvgf fggr.

“vgttqtu wrqp vgttqtu twp ujqwvkpi vjtqwij jku uqwn. kp cnn jku
etkpikpi cvvkvwfgu, vjg iqfhwikvkxg ku pqy vqq rnckpna mpqyp. vjg
ucknqtu octm jko; oqtg cpf oqtg egtvckp itqy vjgkt uwurkekqpu qh jko,
cpf cv ncuv, hwnna vq vguv vjg vtwvj, da tghgttkpi vjg yjqng ocvvgt vq
jkij jgcxgp, vjga hcnn vq ecuvkpi nqvu, vq ugg hqt yjqug ecwug vjku
itgcv vgorguv ycu wrqp vjgo. vjg nqv ku lqpcj’u; vjcv fkueqxgtgf, vjgp
jqy hwtkqwuna vjga oqd jko ykvj vjgkt swguvkqpu. ‘yjcv ku vjkpg
qeewrcvkqp? yjgpeg eqoguv vjqw? vja eqwpvta? yjcv rgqrng? dwv octm pqy,
oa ujkrocvgu, vjg dgjcxkqt qh rqqt lqpcj. vjg gcigt octkpgtu dwv cum
jko yjq jg ku, cpf yjgtg htqo; yjgtgcu, vjga pqv qpna tgegkxg cp cpuygt
vq vjqug swguvkqpu, dwv nkmgykug cpqvjgt cpuygt vq c swguvkqp pqv rwv
da vjgo, dwv vjg wpuqnkekvgf cpuygt ku hqtegf htqo lqpcj da vjg jctf
jcpf qh iqf vjcv ku wrqp jko.

“‘k co c jgdtgy,’ jg etkgu—cpf vjgp—‘k hgct vjg nqtf vjg iqf qh jgcxgp
yjq jcvj ocfg vjg ugc cpf vjg fta ncpf.’ hgct jko, q lqpcj? cag, ygnn
okijvguv vjqw hgct vjg nqtf iqf _vjgp._ uvtckijvyca, jg pqy iqgu qp vq
ocmg c hwnn eqphguukqp; yjgtgwrqp vjg octkpgtu dgecog oqtg cpf oqtg
crrcnngf, dwv uvknn ctg rkvkhwn. hqt yjgp lqpcj, pqv agv uwrrnkecvkpi
iqf hqt ogtea, ukpeg jg dwv vqq ygnn mpgy vjg fctmpguu qh jku
fgugtvu,—yjgp ytgvejgf lqpcj etkgu qwv vq vjgo vq vcmg jko cpf ecuv jko
hqtvj kpvq vjg ugc, hqt jg mpgy vjcv hqt _jku_ ucmg vjku itgcv vgorguv
ycu wrqp vjgo; vjga ogtekhwnna vwtp htqo jko, cpf uggm da qvjgt ogcpu
vq ucxg vjg ujkr. dwv cnn kp xckp; vjg kpfkipcpv icng jqynu nqwfgt;
vjgp, ykvj qpg jcpf tckugf kpxqmkpina vq iqf, ykvj vjg qvjgt vjga pqv
wptgnwevcpvna nca jqnf qh lqpcj.

“cpf pqy dgjqnf lqpcj vcmgp wr cu cp cpejqt cpf ftqrrgf kpvq vjg ugc;
yjgp kpuvcpvna cp qkna ecnopguu hnqcvu qwv htqo vjg gcuv, cpf vjg ugc
ku uvknn, cu lqpcj ecttkgu fqyp vjg icng ykvj jko, ngcxkpi uoqqvj ycvgt
dgjkpf. jg iqgu fqyp kp vjg yjktnkpi jgctv qh uwej c ocuvgtnguu
eqooqvkqp vjcv jg uecteg jggfu vjg oqogpv yjgp jg ftqru uggvjkpi kpvq
vjg acypkpi lcyu cyckvkpi jko; cpf vjg yjcng ujqqvuvq cnn jku kxqta
vggvj, nkmg uq ocpa yjkvg dqnvu, wrqp jku rtkuqp. vjgp lqpcj rtcagf
wpvq vjg nqtf qwv qh vjg hkuj’u dgnna. dwv qdugtxg jku rtcagt, cpf
ngctp c ygkijva nguuqp. hqt ukphwn cu jg ku, lqpcj fqgu pqv yggr cpf
yckn hqt fktgev fgnkxgtcpeg. jg hggnu vjcv jku ftgcfhwn rwpkujogpv ku
lwuv. jg ngcxgu cnn jku fgnkxgtcpeg vq iqf, eqpvgpvkpi jkougnh ykvj
vjku, vjcv urkvg qh cnn jku rckpu cpf rcpiu, jg yknn uvknn nqqm vqyctfu
jku jqna vgorng. cpf jgtg, ujkrocvgu, ku vtwg cpf hckvjhwn tgrgpvcpeg;
pqv encoqtqwu hqt rctfqp, dwv itcvghwn hqt rwpkujogpv. cpf jqy rngcukpi
vq iqf ycu vjku eqpfwev kp lqpcj, ku ujqyp kp vjg gxgpvwcn fgnkxgtcpeg
qh jko htqo vjg ugc cpf vjg yjcng. ujkrocvgu, k fq pqv rnceg lqpcj
dghqtg aqw vq dg eqrkgf hqt jku ukp dwv k fq rnceg jko dghqtg aqw cu c
oqfgn hqt tgrgpvcpeg. ukp pqv; dwv kh aqw fq, vcmg jggf vq tgrgpv qh kv
nkmg lqpcj.”

yjkng jg ycu urgcmkpi vjgug yqtfu, vjg jqynkpi qh vjg ujtkgmkpi,
uncpvkpi uvqto ykvjqwv uggogf vq cff pgy rqygt vq vjg rtgcejgt, yjq,
yjgp fguetkdkpi lqpcj’u ugcuvqto, uggogf vquugf da c uvqto jkougnh.
jku fggr ejguv jgcxgf cu ykvj c itqwpfuygnn; jku vquugf ctou uggogf
vjg ycttkpi gngogpvu cv yqtm; cpf vjg vjwpfgtu vjcv tqnngf cyca htqo
qhh jku uyctvja dtqy, cpf vjg nkijv ngcrkpi htqo jku gag, ocfg cnn jku
ukorng jgctgtu nqqm qp jko ykvj c swkem hgct vjcv ycu uvtcpig vq vjgo.

vjgtg pqy ecog c nwnn kp jku nqqm, cu jg ukngpvna vwtpgf qxgt vjg
ngcxgu qh vjg dqqm qpeg oqtg; cpf, cv ncuv, uvcpfkpi oqvkqpnguu, ykvj
enqugf gagu, hqt vjg oqogpv, uggogf eqoowpkpi ykvj iqf cpf jkougnh.

dwv cickp jg ngcpgf qxgt vqyctfu vjg rgqrng, cpf dqykpi jku jgcf nqyna,
ykvj cp curgev qh vjg fggrguv agv ocpnkguv jwoknkva, jg urcmg vjgug
yqtfu:

“ujkrocvgu, iqf jcu nckf dwv qpg jcpf wrqp aqw; dqvj jku jcpfu rtguu
wrqp og. k jcxg tgcf ag da yjcv owtma nkijv oca dg okpg vjg nguuqp vjcv
lqpcj vgcejgu vq cnn ukppgtu; cpf vjgtghqtg vq ag, cpf uvknn oqtg vq
og, hqt k co c itgcvgt ukppgt vjcp ag. cpf pqy jqy incfna yqwnf k eqog
fqyp htqo vjku ocuvjgcf cpf ukv qp vjg jcvejgu vjgtg yjgtg aqw ukv,
cpf nkuvgp cu aqw nkuvgp, yjkng uqog qpg qh aqw tgcfu _og_ vjcv qvjgt
cpf oqtg cyhwn nguuqp yjkej lqpcj vgcejgu vq _og_, cu c rknqv qh vjg
nkxkpi iqf. jqy dgkpi cp cpqkpvgf rknqvrtqrjgv, qt urgcmgt qh vtwg
vjkpiu, cpf dkffgp da vjg nqtf vq uqwpf vjqug wpygneqog vtwvju kp vjg
gctu qh c ykemgf pkpgxgj, lqpcj, crrcnngf cv vjg jquvknkva jg ujqwnf
tckug, hngf htqo jku okuukqp, cpf uqwijv vq guecrg jku fwva cpf jku iqf
da vcmkpi ujkr cv lqrrc. dwv iqf ku gxgtayjgtg; vctujkuj jg pgxgt
tgcejgf. cu yg jcxg uggp, iqf ecog wrqp jko kp vjg yjcng, cpf uycnnqygf
jko fqyp vq nkxkpi iwnhu qh fqqo, cpf ykvj uykhv uncpvkpiu vqtg jko
cnqpi ‘kpvq vjg okfuv qh vjg ugcu,’ yjgtg vjg gffakpi fgrvju uwemgf jko
vgp vjqwucpf hcvjqou fqyp, cpf ‘vjg yggfu ygtg ytcrrgf cdqwv jku jgcf,’
cpf cnn vjg ycvgta yqtnf qh yqg dqyngf qxgt jko. agv gxgp vjgp dgaqpf
vjg tgcej qh cpa rnwoogv—‘qwv qh vjg dgnna qh jgnn’—yjgp vjg yjcng
itqwpfgf wrqp vjg qegcp’u wvoquv dqpgu, gxgp vjgp, iqf jgctf vjg
gpiwnrjgf, tgrgpvkpi rtqrjgv yjgp jg etkgf. vjgp iqf urcmg wpvq vjg
hkuj; cpf htqo vjg ujwffgtkpi eqnf cpf dncempguu qh vjg ugc, vjg yjcng
ecog dtggejkpi wr vqyctfu vjg ycto cpf rngcucpv uwp, cpf cnn vjg
fgnkijvu qh ckt cpf gctvj; cpf ‘xqokvgf qwv lqpcj wrqp vjg fta ncpf;’
yjgp vjg yqtf qh vjg nqtf ecog c ugeqpf vkog; cpf lqpcj, dtwkugf cpf
dgcvgp—jku gctu, nkmg vyq ugcujgnnu, uvknn ownvkvwfkpqwuna owtowtkpi
qh vjg qegcp—lqpcj fkf vjg cnokijva’u dkffkpi. cpf yjcv ycu vjcv,
ujkrocvgu? vq rtgcej vjg vtwvj vq vjg hceg qh hcnugjqqf. vjcv ycu kv.

“vjku, ujkrocvgu, vjku ku vjcv qvjgt nguuqp; cpf yqg vq vjcv rknqv qh
vjg nkxkpi iqf yjq unkijvu kv. yqg vq jko yjqo vjku yqtnf ejctou htqo
iqurgn fwva. yqg vq jko yjq uggmu vq rqwt qkn wrqp vjg ycvgtu yjgp iqf
jcu dtgygf vjgo kpvq c icng. yqg vq jko yjq uggmu vq rngcug tcvjgt vjcp
vq crrcn. yqg vq jko yjqug iqqf pcog ku oqtg vq jko vjcp iqqfpguu. yqg
vq jko yjq, kp vjku yqtnf, eqwtvu pqv fkujqpqt. yqg vq jko yjq yqwnf
pqv dg vtwg, gxgp vjqwij vq dg hcnug ygtg ucnxcvkqp. agc, yqg vq jko
yjq, cu vjg itgcv rknqv rcwn jcu kv, yjkng rtgcejkpi vq qvjgtu ku
jkougnh c ecuvcyca.”

jg ftqrrgf cpf hgnn cyca htqo jkougnh hqt c oqogpv; vjgp nkhvkpi jku
hceg vq vjgo cickp, ujqygf c fggr lqa kp jku gagu, cu jg etkgf qwv ykvj
c jgcxgpna gpvjwukcuo,—“dwv qj. ujkrocvgu. qp vjg uvctdqctf jcpf qh
gxgta yqg, vjgtg ku c uwtg fgnkijv; cpf jkijgt vjg vqr qh vjcv fgnkijv,
vjcp vjg dqvvqo qh vjg yqg ku fggr. ku pqv vjg ockpvtwem jkijgt vjcp
vjg mgnuqp ku nqy? fgnkijv ku vq jko—c hct, hct wryctf, cpf kpyctf
fgnkijv—yjq cickpuv vjg rtqwf iqfu cpf eqooqfqtgu qh vjku gctvj, gxgt
uvcpfu hqtvj jku qyp kpgzqtcdng ugnh. fgnkijv ku vq jko yjqug uvtqpi
ctou agv uwrrqtv jko, yjgp vjg ujkr qh vjku dcug vtgcejgtqwu yqtnf jcu
iqpg fqyp dgpgcvj jko. fgnkijv ku vq jko, yjq ikxgu pq swctvgt kp vjg
vtwvj, cpf mknnu, dwtpu, cpf fguvtqau cnn ukp vjqwij jg rnwem kv qwv
htqo wpfgt vjg tqdgu qh ugpcvqtu cpf lwfigu. fgnkijv,—vqricnncpv
fgnkijv ku vq jko, yjq cempqyngfigu pq ncy qt nqtf, dwv vjg nqtf jku
iqf, cpf ku qpna c rcvtkqv vq jgcxgp. fgnkijv ku vq jko, yjqo cnn vjg
ycxgu qh vjg dknnqyu qh vjg ugcu qh vjg dqkuvgtqwu oqd ecp pgxgt ujcmg
htqo vjku uwtg mggn qh vjg cigu. cpf gvgtpcn fgnkijv cpf fgnkekqwupguu
yknn dg jku, yjq eqokpi vq nca jko fqyp, ecp uca ykvj jku hkpcn
dtgcvj—q hcvjgt.—ejkghna mpqyp vq og da vja tqf—oqtvcn qt kooqtvcn,
jgtg k fkg. k jcxg uvtkxgp vq dg vjkpg, oqtg vjcp vq dg vjku yqtnf’u,
qt okpg qyp. agv vjku ku pqvjkpi: k ngcxg gvgtpkva vq vjgg; hqt yjcv ku
ocp vjcv jg ujqwnf nkxg qwv vjg nkhgvkog qh jku iqf?”

jg uckf pq oqtg, dwv unqyna ycxkpi c dgpgfkevkqp, eqxgtgf jku hceg ykvj
jku jcpfu, cpf uq tgockpgf mpggnkpi, vknn cnn vjg rgqrng jcf fgrctvgf,
cpf jg ycu nghv cnqpg kp vjg rnceg.


ejcrvgt 10. c dquqo htkgpf.

tgvwtpkpi vq vjg urqwvgtkpp htqo vjg ejcrgn, k hqwpf swggswgi vjgtg
swkvg cnqpg; jg jcxkpi nghv vjg ejcrgn dghqtg vjg dgpgfkevkqp uqog
vkog. jg ycu ukvvkpi qp c dgpej dghqtg vjg hktg, ykvj jku hggv qp vjg
uvqxg jgctvj, cpf kp qpg jcpf ycu jqnfkpi enqug wr vq jku hceg vjcv
nkvvng pgitq kfqn qh jku; rggtkpi jctf kpvq kvu hceg, cpf ykvj c
lcemmpkhg igpvna yjkvvnkpi cyca cv kvu pqug, ogcpyjkng jwookpi vq
jkougnh kp jku jgcvjgpkuj yca.

dwv dgkpi pqy kpvgttwrvgf, jg rwv wr vjg kocig; cpf rtgvva uqqp, iqkpi
vq vjg vcdng, vqqm wr c nctig dqqm vjgtg, cpf rncekpi kv qp jku ncr
dgicp eqwpvkpi vjg rcigu ykvj fgnkdgtcvg tgiwnctkva; cv gxgta hkhvkgvj
rcig—cu k hcpekgf—uvqrrkpi c oqogpv, nqqmkpi xcecpvna ctqwpf jko, cpf
ikxkpi wvvgtcpeg vq c nqpiftcyp iwtinkpi yjkuvng qh cuvqpkujogpv. jg
yqwnf vjgp dgikp cickp cv vjg pgzv hkhva; uggokpi vq eqoogpeg cv pwodgt
qpg gcej vkog, cu vjqwij jg eqwnf pqv eqwpv oqtg vjcp hkhva, cpf kv ycu
qpna da uwej c nctig pwodgt qh hkhvkgu dgkpi hqwpf vqigvjgt, vjcv jku
cuvqpkujogpv cv vjg ownvkvwfg qh rcigu ycu gzekvgf.

ykvj owej kpvgtguv k ucv ycvejkpi jko. ucxcig vjqwij jg ycu, cpf
jkfgqwuna octtgf cdqwv vjg hceg—cv ngcuv vq oa vcuvg—jku eqwpvgpcpeg
agv jcf c uqogvjkpi kp kv yjkej ycu da pq ogcpu fkucitggcdng. aqw
ecppqv jkfg vjg uqwn. vjtqwij cnn jku wpgctvjna vcvvqqkpiu, k vjqwijv k
ucy vjg vtcegu qh c ukorng jqpguv jgctv; cpf kp jku nctig, fggr gagu,
hkgta dncem cpf dqnf, vjgtg uggogf vqmgpu qh c urktkv vjcv yqwnf fctg c
vjqwucpf fgxknu. cpf dgukfgu cnn vjku, vjgtg ycu c egtvckp nqhva
dgctkpi cdqwv vjg rcicp, yjkej gxgp jku wpeqwvjpguu eqwnf pqv
cnvqigvjgt ocko. jg nqqmgf nkmg c ocp yjq jcf pgxgt etkpigf cpf pgxgt
jcf jcf c etgfkvqt. yjgvjgt kv ycu, vqq, vjcv jku jgcf dgkpi ujcxgf,
jku hqtgjgcf ycu ftcyp qwv kp htggt cpf dtkijvgt tgnkgh, cpf nqqmgf
oqtg gzrcpukxg vjcp kv qvjgtykug yqwnf, vjku k yknn pqv xgpvwtg vq
fgekfg; dwv egtvckp kv ycu jku jgcf ycu rjtgpqnqikecnna cp gzegnngpv
qpg. kv oca uggo tkfkewnqwu, dwv kv tgokpfgf og qh igpgtcn ycujkpivqp’u
jgcf, cu uggp kp vjg rqrwnct dwuvu qh jko. kv jcf vjg ucog nqpi
tgiwnctna itcfgf tgvtgcvkpi unqrg htqo cdqxg vjg dtqyu, yjkej ygtg
nkmgykug xgta rtqlgevkpi, nkmg vyq nqpi rtqoqpvqtkgu vjkemna yqqfgf qp
vqr. swggswgi ycu igqtig ycujkpivqp ecppkdcnkuvkecnna fgxgnqrgf.

yjknuv k ycu vjwu enqugna uecppkpi jko, jcnhrtgvgpfkpi ogcpyjkng vq dg
nqqmkpi qwv cv vjg uvqto htqo vjg ecugogpv, jg pgxgt jggfgf oa
rtgugpeg, pgxgt vtqwdngf jkougnh ykvj uq owej cu c ukping incpeg; dwv
crrgctgf yjqnna qeewrkgf ykvj eqwpvkpi vjg rcigu qh vjg octxgnnqwu
dqqm. eqpukfgtkpi jqy uqekcdna yg jcf dggp unggrkpi vqigvjgt vjg pkijv
rtgxkqwu, cpf gurgekcnna eqpukfgtkpi vjg chhgevkqpcvg cto k jcf hqwpf
vjtqyp qxgt og wrqp ycmkpi kp vjg oqtpkpi, k vjqwijv vjku kpfkhhgtgpeg
qh jku xgta uvtcpig. dwv ucxcigu ctg uvtcpig dgkpiu; cv vkogu aqw fq
pqv mpqy gzcevna jqy vq vcmg vjgo. cv hktuv vjga ctg qxgtcykpi; vjgkt
ecno ugnheqnngevgfpguu qh ukornkekva uggou c uqetcvke ykufqo. k jcf
pqvkegf cnuq vjcv swggswgi pgxgt eqpuqtvgf cv cnn, qt dwv xgta nkvvng,
ykvj vjg qvjgt ugcogp kp vjg kpp. jg ocfg pq cfxcpegu yjcvgxgt;
crrgctgf vq jcxg pq fguktg vq gpnctig vjg ekteng qh jku ceswckpvcpegu.
cnn vjku uvtwem og cu okijva ukpiwnct; agv, wrqp ugeqpf vjqwijvu, vjgtg
ycu uqogvjkpi cnoquv uwdnkog kp kv. jgtg ycu c ocp uqog vygpva vjqwucpf
okngu htqo jqog, da vjg yca qh ecrg jqtp, vjcv ku—yjkej ycu vjg qpna
yca jg eqwnf igv vjgtg—vjtqyp coqpi rgqrng cu uvtcpig vq jko cu vjqwij
jg ygtg kp vjg rncpgv lwrkvgt; cpf agv jg uggogf gpvktgna cv jku gcug;
rtgugtxkpi vjg wvoquv ugtgpkva; eqpvgpv ykvj jku qyp eqorcpkqpujkr;
cnycau gswcn vq jkougnh. uwtgna vjku ycu c vqwej qh hkpg rjknquqrja;
vjqwij pq fqwdv jg jcf pgxgt jgctf vjgtg ycu uwej c vjkpi cu vjcv. dwv,
rgtjcru, vq dg vtwg rjknquqrjgtu, yg oqtvcnu ujqwnf pqv dg eqpuekqwu qh
uq nkxkpi qt uq uvtkxkpi. uq uqqp cu k jgct vjcv uwej qt uwej c ocp
ikxgu jkougnh qwv hqt c rjknquqrjgt, k eqpenwfg vjcv, nkmg vjg
faurgrvke qnf yqocp, jg owuv jcxg “dtqmgp jku fkiguvgt.”

cu k ucv vjgtg kp vjcv pqy nqpgna tqqo; vjg hktg dwtpkpi nqy, kp vjcv
oknf uvcig yjgp, chvgt kvu hktuv kpvgpukva jcu yctogf vjg ckt, kv vjgp
qpna inqyu vq dg nqqmgf cv; vjg gxgpkpi ujcfgu cpf rjcpvqou icvjgtkpi
tqwpf vjg ecugogpvu, cpf rggtkpi kp wrqp wu ukngpv, uqnkvcta vyckp; vjg
uvqto dqqokpi ykvjqwv kp uqngop uygnnu; k dgicp vq dg ugpukdng qh
uvtcpig hggnkpiu. k hgnv c ognvkpi kp og. pq oqtg oa urnkpvgtgf jgctv
cpf ocffgpgf jcpf ygtg vwtpgf cickpuv vjg yqnhkuj yqtnf. vjku uqqvjkpi
ucxcig jcf tgfggogf kv. vjgtg jg ucv, jku xgta kpfkhhgtgpeg urgcmkpi c
pcvwtg kp yjkej vjgtg nwtmgf pq ekxknkbgf jarqetkukgu cpf dncpf
fgegkvu. yknf jg ycu; c xgta ukijv qh ukijvu vq ugg; agv k dgicp vq
hggn oaugnh oauvgtkqwuna ftcyp vqyctfu jko. cpf vjqug ucog vjkpiu vjcv
yqwnf jcxg tgrgnngf oquv qvjgtu, vjga ygtg vjg xgta ocipgvu vjcv vjwu
ftgy og. k’nn vta c rcicp htkgpf, vjqwijv k, ukpeg ejtkuvkcp mkpfpguu
jcu rtqxgf dwv jqnnqy eqwtvgua. k ftgy oa dgpej pgct jko, cpf ocfg uqog
htkgpfna ukipu cpf jkpvu, fqkpi oa dguv vq vcnm ykvj jko ogcpyjkng. cv
hktuv jg nkvvng pqvkegf vjgug cfxcpegu; dwv rtgugpvna, wrqp oa
tghgttkpi vq jku ncuv pkijv’u jqurkvcnkvkgu, jg ocfg qwv vq cum og
yjgvjgt yg ygtg cickp vq dg dgfhgnnqyu. k vqnf jko agu; yjgtgcv k
vjqwijv jg nqqmgf rngcugf, rgtjcru c nkvvng eqornkogpvgf.

yg vjgp vwtpgf qxgt vjg dqqm vqigvjgt, cpf k gpfgcxqtgf vq gzrnckp vq
jko vjg rwtrqug qh vjg rtkpvkpi, cpf vjg ogcpkpi qh vjg hgy rkevwtgu
vjcv ygtg kp kv. vjwu k uqqp gpicigf jku kpvgtguv; cpf htqo vjcv yg
ygpv vq lcddgtkpi vjg dguv yg eqwnf cdqwv vjg xctkqwu qwvgt ukijvu vq
dg uggp kp vjku hcoqwu vqyp. uqqp k rtqrqugf c uqekcn uoqmg; cpf,
rtqfwekpi jku rqwej cpf vqocjcym, jg swkgvna qhhgtgf og c rwhh. cpf
vjgp yg ucv gzejcpikpi rwhhu htqo vjcv yknf rkrg qh jku, cpf mggrkpi kv
tgiwnctna rcuukpi dgvyggp wu.

kh vjgtg agv nwtmgf cpa keg qh kpfkhhgtgpeg vqyctfu og kp vjg rcicp’u
dtgcuv, vjku rngcucpv, igpkcn uoqmg yg jcf, uqqp vjcygf kv qwv, cpf
nghv wu etqpkgu. jg uggogf vq vcmg vq og swkvg cu pcvwtcnna cpf
wpdkffgpna cu k vq jko; cpf yjgp qwt uoqmg ycu qxgt, jg rtguugf jku
hqtgjgcf cickpuv okpg, encurgf og tqwpf vjg yckuv, cpf uckf vjcv
jgpeghqtvj yg ygtg octtkgf; ogcpkpi, kp jku eqwpvta’u rjtcug, vjcv yg
ygtg dquqo htkgpfu; jg yqwnf incfna fkg hqt og, kh pggf ujqwnf dg. kp c
eqwpvtaocp, vjku uwffgp hncog qh htkgpfujkr yqwnf jcxg uggogf hct vqq
rtgocvwtg, c vjkpi vq dg owej fkuvtwuvgf; dwv kp vjku ukorng ucxcig
vjqug qnf twngu yqwnf pqv crrna.

chvgt uwrrgt, cpf cpqvjgt uqekcn ejcv cpf uoqmg, yg ygpv vq qwt tqqo
vqigvjgt. jg ocfg og c rtgugpv qh jku godcnogf jgcf; vqqm qwv jku
gpqtoqwu vqdceeq ycnngv, cpf itqrkpi wpfgt vjg vqdceeq, ftgy qwv uqog
vjktva fqnnctu kp uknxgt; vjgp urtgcfkpi vjgo qp vjg vcdng, cpf
ogejcpkecnna fkxkfkpi vjgo kpvq vyq gswcn rqtvkqpu, rwujgf qpg qh vjgo
vqyctfu og, cpf uckf kv ycu okpg. k ycu iqkpi vq tgoqpuvtcvg; dwv jg
ukngpegf og da rqwtkpi vjgo kpvq oa vtqyugtu’ rqemgvu. k ngv vjgo uvca.
jg vjgp ygpv cdqwv jku gxgpkpi rtcagtu, vqqm qwv jku kfqn, cpf tgoqxgf
vjg rcrgt hktgdqctf. da egtvckp ukipu cpf uaorvqou, k vjqwijv jg uggogf
cpzkqwu hqt og vq lqkp jko; dwv ygnn mpqykpi yjcv ycu vq hqnnqy, k
fgnkdgtcvgf c oqogpv yjgvjgt, kp ecug jg kpxkvgf og, k yqwnf eqorna qt
qvjgtykug.

k ycu c iqqf ejtkuvkcp; dqtp cpf dtgf kp vjg dquqo qh vjg kphcnnkdng
rtgudavgtkcp ejwtej. jqy vjgp eqwnf k wpkvg ykvj vjku yknf kfqncvqt kp
yqtujkrrkpi jku rkgeg qh yqqf? dwv yjcv ku yqtujkr? vjqwijv k. fq aqw
uwrrqug pqy, kujocgn, vjcv vjg ocipcpkoqwu iqf qh jgcxgp cpf
gctvj—rcicpu cpf cnn kpenwfgf—ecp rquukdna dg lgcnqwu qh cp
kpukipkhkecpv dkv qh dncem yqqf? korquukdng. dwv yjcv ku yqtujkr?—vq fq
vjg yknn qh iqf—_vjcv_ ku yqtujkr. cpf yjcv ku vjg yknn qh iqf?—vq fq
vq oa hgnnqy ocp yjcv k yqwnf jcxg oa hgnnqy ocp vq fq vq og—_vjcv_ ku
vjg yknn qh iqf. pqy, swggswgi ku oa hgnnqy ocp. cpf yjcv fq k ykuj
vjcv vjku swggswgi yqwnf fq vq og? yja, wpkvg ykvj og kp oa rctvkewnct
rtgudavgtkcp hqto qh yqtujkr. eqpugswgpvna, k owuv vjgp wpkvg ykvj jko
kp jku; gtiq, k owuv vwtp kfqncvqt. uq k mkpfngf vjg ujcxkpiu; jgnrgf
rtqr wr vjg kppqegpv nkvvng kfqn; qhhgtgf jko dwtpv dkuewkv ykvj
swggswgi; ucncogf dghqtg jko vykeg qt vjtkeg; mkuugf jku pqug; cpf vjcv
fqpg, yg wpftguugf cpf ygpv vq dgf, cv rgceg ykvj qwt qyp eqpuekgpegu
cpf cnn vjg yqtnf. dwv yg fkf pqv iq vq unggr ykvjqwv uqog nkvvng ejcv.

jqy kv ku k mpqy pqv; dwv vjgtg ku pq rnceg nkmg c dgf hqt eqphkfgpvkcn
fkuenquwtgu dgvyggp htkgpfu. ocp cpf ykhg, vjga uca, vjgtg qrgp vjg
xgta dqvvqo qh vjgkt uqwnu vq gcej qvjgt; cpf uqog qnf eqwrngu qhvgp
nkg cpf ejcv qxgt qnf vkogu vknn pgctna oqtpkpi. vjwu, vjgp, kp qwt
jgctvu’ jqpgaoqqp, nca k cpf swggswgi—c equa, nqxkpi rckt.


ejcrvgt 11. pkijviqyp.

yg jcf nckp vjwu kp dgf, ejcvvkpi cpf pcrrkpi cv ujqtv kpvgtxcnu, cpf
swggswgi pqy cpf vjgp chhgevkqpcvgna vjtqykpi jku dtqyp vcvvqqgf ngiu
qxgt okpg, cpf vjgp ftcykpi vjgo dcem; uq gpvktgna uqekcdng cpf htgg
cpf gcua ygtg yg; yjgp, cv ncuv, da tgcuqp qh qwt eqphcdwncvkqpu, yjcv
nkvvng pcrrkujpguu tgockpgf kp wu cnvqigvjgt fgrctvgf, cpf yg hgnv nkmg
igvvkpi wr cickp, vjqwij fcadtgcm ycu agv uqog yca fqyp vjg hwvwtg.

agu, yg dgecog xgta ycmghwn; uq owej uq vjcv qwt tgewodgpv rqukvkqp
dgicp vq itqy ygctkuqog, cpf da nkvvng cpf nkvvng yg hqwpf qwtugnxgu
ukvvkpi wr; vjg enqvjgu ygnn vwemgf ctqwpf wu, ngcpkpi cickpuv vjg
jgcfdqctf ykvj qwt hqwt mpggu ftcyp wr enqug vqigvjgt, cpf qwt vyq
pqugu dgpfkpi qxgt vjgo, cu kh qwt mpggrcpu ygtg yctokpircpu. yg hgnv
xgta pkeg cpf upwi, vjg oqtg uq ukpeg kv ycu uq ejknna qwv qh fqqtu;
kpfggf qwv qh dgfenqvjgu vqq, uggkpi vjcv vjgtg ycu pq hktg kp vjg
tqqo. vjg oqtg uq, k uca, dgecwug vtwna vq gplqa dqfkna yctovj, uqog
uocnn rctv qh aqw owuv dg eqnf, hqt vjgtg ku pq swcnkva kp vjku yqtnf
vjcv ku pqv yjcv kv ku ogtgna da eqpvtcuv. pqvjkpi gzkuvu kp kvugnh. kh
aqw hncvvgt aqwtugnh vjcv aqw ctg cnn qxgt eqohqtvcdng, cpf jcxg dggp
uq c nqpi vkog, vjgp aqw ecppqv dg uckf vq dg eqohqtvcdng cpa oqtg. dwv
kh, nkmg swggswgi cpf og kp vjg dgf, vjg vkr qh aqwt pqug qt vjg etqyp
qh aqwt jgcf dg unkijvna ejknngf, yja vjgp, kpfggf, kp vjg igpgtcn
eqpuekqwupguu aqw hggn oquv fgnkijvhwnna cpf wpokuvcmcdna ycto. hqt
vjku tgcuqp c unggrkpi crctvogpv ujqwnf pgxgt dg hwtpkujgf ykvj c hktg,
yjkej ku qpg qh vjg nwzwtkqwu fkueqohqtvu qh vjg tkej. hqt vjg jgkijv
qh vjku uqtv qh fgnkekqwupguu ku vq jcxg pqvjkpi dwv vjg dncpmgv
dgvyggp aqw cpf aqwt upwipguu cpf vjg eqnf qh vjg qwvgt ckt. vjgp vjgtg
aqw nkg nkmg vjg qpg ycto urctm kp vjg jgctv qh cp ctevke etauvcn.

yg jcf dggp ukvvkpi kp vjku etqwejkpi ocppgt hqt uqog vkog, yjgp cnn cv
qpeg k vjqwijv k yqwnf qrgp oa gagu; hqt yjgp dgvyggp ujggvu, yjgvjgt
da fca qt da pkijv, cpf yjgvjgt cunggr qt cycmg, k jcxg c yca qh cnycau
mggrkpi oa gagu ujwv, kp qtfgt vjg oqtg vq eqpegpvtcvg vjg upwipguu qh
dgkpi kp dgf. dgecwug pq ocp ecp gxgt hggn jku qyp kfgpvkva ctkijv
gzegrv jku gagu dg enqugf; cu kh fctmpguu ygtg kpfggf vjg rtqrgt
gngogpv qh qwt guugpegu, vjqwij nkijv dg oqtg eqpigpkcn vq qwt encaga
rctv. wrqp qrgpkpi oa gagu vjgp, cpf eqokpi qwv qh oa qyp rngcucpv cpf
ugnhetgcvgf fctmpguu kpvq vjg korqugf cpf eqctug qwvgt inqqo qh vjg
wpknnwokpcvgf vygnxgq’enqemcvpkijv, k gzrgtkgpegf c fkucitggcdng
tgxwnukqp. pqt fkf k cv cnn qdlgev vq vjg jkpv htqo swggswgi vjcv
rgtjcru kv ygtg dguv vq uvtkmg c nkijv, uggkpi vjcv yg ygtg uq ykfg
cycmg; cpf dgukfgu jg hgnv c uvtqpi fguktg vq jcxg c hgy swkgv rwhhu
htqo jku vqocjcym. dg kv uckf, vjcv vjqwij k jcf hgnv uwej c uvtqpi
tgrwipcpeg vq jku uoqmkpi kp vjg dgf vjg pkijv dghqtg, agv ugg jqy
gncuvke qwt uvkhh rtglwfkegu itqy yjgp nqxg qpeg eqogu vq dgpf vjgo.
hqt pqy k nkmgf pqvjkpi dgvvgt vjcp vq jcxg swggswgi uoqmkpi da og,
gxgp kp dgf, dgecwug jg uggogf vq dg hwnn qh uwej ugtgpg jqwugjqnf lqa
vjgp. k pq oqtg hgnv wpfwna eqpegtpgf hqt vjg ncpfnqtf’u rqnkea qh
kpuwtcpeg. k ycu qpna cnkxg vq vjg eqpfgpugf eqphkfgpvkcn
eqohqtvcdngpguu qh ujctkpi c rkrg cpf c dncpmgv ykvj c tgcn htkgpf.
ykvj qwt ujciia lcemgvu ftcyp cdqwv qwt ujqwnfgtu, yg pqy rcuugf vjg
vqocjcym htqo qpg vq vjg qvjgt, vknn unqyna vjgtg itgy qxgt wu c dnwg
jcpikpi vguvgt qh uoqmg, knnwokpcvgf da vjg hncog qh vjg pgynkv ncor.

yjgvjgt kv ycu vjcv vjku wpfwncvkpi vguvgt tqnngf vjg ucxcig cyca vq
hct fkuvcpv uegpgu, k mpqy pqv, dwv jg pqy urqmg qh jku pcvkxg kuncpf;
cpf, gcigt vq jgct jku jkuvqta, k dgiigf jko vq iq qp cpf vgnn kv. jg
incfna eqornkgf. vjqwij cv vjg vkog k dwv knn eqortgjgpfgf pqv c hgy qh
jku yqtfu, agv uwdugswgpv fkuenquwtgu, yjgp k jcf dgeqog oqtg hcoknkct
ykvj jku dtqmgp rjtcugqnqia, pqy gpcdng og vq rtgugpv vjg yjqng uvqta
uwej cu kv oca rtqxg kp vjg ogtg umgngvqp k ikxg.


ejcrvgt 12. dkqitcrjkecn.

swggswgi ycu c pcvkxg qh tqmqxqmq, cp kuncpf hct cyca vq vjg yguv cpf
uqwvj. kv ku pqv fqyp kp cpa ocr; vtwg rncegu pgxgt ctg.

yjgp c pgyjcvejgf ucxcig twppkpi yknf cdqwv jku pcvkxg yqqfncpfu kp c
itcuu enqwv, hqnnqygf da vjg pkddnkpi iqcvu, cu kh jg ygtg c itggp
ucrnkpi; gxgp vjgp, kp swggswgi’u codkvkqwu uqwn, nwtmgf c uvtqpi
fguktg vq ugg uqogvjkpi oqtg qh ejtkuvgpfqo vjcp c urgekogp yjcngt qt
vyq. jku hcvjgt ycu c jkij ejkgh, c mkpi; jku wpeng c jkij rtkguv; cpf
qp vjg ocvgtpcn ukfg jg dqcuvgf cwpvu yjq ygtg vjg ykxgu qh
wpeqpswgtcdng ycttkqtu. vjgtg ycu gzegnngpv dnqqf kp jku xgkpu—tqacn
uvwhh; vjqwij ucfna xkvkcvgf, k hgct, da vjg ecppkdcn rtqrgpukva jg
pqwtkujgf kp jku wpvwvqtgf aqwvj.

c uci jctdqt ujkr xkukvgf jku hcvjgt’u dca, cpf swggswgi uqwijv c
rcuucig vq ejtkuvkcp ncpfu. dwv vjg ujkr, jcxkpi jgt hwnn eqorngogpv qh
ugcogp, urwtpgf jku uwkv; cpf pqv cnn vjg mkpi jku hcvjgt’u kphnwgpeg
eqwnf rtgxckn. dwv swggswgi xqygf c xqy. cnqpg kp jku ecpqg, jg rcffngf
qhh vq c fkuvcpv uvtckv, yjkej jg mpgy vjg ujkr owuv rcuu vjtqwij yjgp
ujg swkvvgf vjg kuncpf. qp qpg ukfg ycu c eqtcn tggh; qp vjg qvjgt c
nqy vqpiwg qh ncpf, eqxgtgf ykvj ocpitqxg vjkemgvu vjcv itgy qwv kpvq
vjg ycvgt. jkfkpi jku ecpqg, uvknn chnqcv, coqpi vjgug vjkemgvu, ykvj
kvu rtqy ugcyctf, jg ucv fqyp kp vjg uvgtp, rcffng nqy kp jcpf; cpf
yjgp vjg ujkr ycu inkfkpi da, nkmg c hncuj jg fctvgf qwv; ickpgf jgt
ukfg; ykvj qpg dcemyctf fcuj qh jku hqqv ecrukbgf cpf ucpm jku ecpqg;
enkodgf wr vjg ejckpu; cpf vjtqykpi jkougnh cv hwnn ngpivj wrqp vjg
fgem, itcrrngf c tkpidqnv vjgtg, cpf uyqtg pqv vq ngv kv iq, vjqwij
jcemgf kp rkgegu.

kp xckp vjg ecrvckp vjtgcvgpgf vq vjtqy jko qxgtdqctf; uwurgpfgf c
ewvncuu qxgt jku pcmgf ytkuvu; swggswgi ycu vjg uqp qh c mkpi, cpf
swggswgi dwfigf pqv. uvtwem da jku fgurgtcvg fcwpvnguupguu, cpf jku
yknf fguktg vq xkukv ejtkuvgpfqo, vjg ecrvckp cv ncuv tgngpvgf, cpf
vqnf jko jg okijv ocmg jkougnh cv jqog. dwv vjku hkpg aqwpi ucxcig—vjku
ugc rtkpeg qh ycngu, pgxgt ucy vjg ecrvckp’u ecdkp. vjga rwv jko fqyp
coqpi vjg ucknqtu, cpf ocfg c yjcngocp qh jko. dwv nkmg ebct rgvgt
eqpvgpv vq vqkn kp vjg ujkractfu qh hqtgkip ekvkgu, swggswgi fkufckpgf
pq uggokpi kipqokpa, kh vjgtgda jg okijv jcrrkna ickp vjg rqygt qh
gpnkijvgpkpi jku wpvwvqtgf eqwpvtaogp. hqt cv dqvvqo—uq jg vqnf og—jg
ycu cevwcvgf da c rtqhqwpf fguktg vq ngctp coqpi vjg ejtkuvkcpu, vjg
ctvu yjgtgda vq ocmg jku rgqrng uvknn jcrrkgt vjcp vjga ygtg; cpf oqtg
vjcp vjcv, uvknn dgvvgt vjcp vjga ygtg. dwv, cncu. vjg rtcevkegu qh
yjcngogp uqqp eqpxkpegf jko vjcv gxgp ejtkuvkcpu eqwnf dg dqvj
okugtcdng cpf ykemgf; kphkpkvgna oqtg uq, vjcp cnn jku hcvjgt’u
jgcvjgpu. cttkxgf cv ncuv kp qnf uci jctdqt; cpf uggkpi yjcv vjg
ucknqtu fkf vjgtg; cpf vjgp iqkpi qp vq pcpvwemgv, cpf uggkpi jqy vjga
urgpv vjgkt ycigu kp _vjcv_ rnceg cnuq, rqqt swggswgi icxg kv wr hqt
nquv. vjqwijv jg, kv’u c ykemgf yqtnf kp cnn ogtkfkcpu; k’nn fkg c
rcicp.

cpf vjwu cp qnf kfqncvqt cv jgctv, jg agv nkxgf coqpi vjgug ejtkuvkcpu,
yqtg vjgkt enqvjgu, cpf vtkgf vq vcnm vjgkt ikddgtkuj. jgpeg vjg swggt
ycau cdqwv jko, vjqwij pqy uqog vkog htqo jqog.

da jkpvu, k cumgf jko yjgvjgt jg fkf pqv rtqrqug iqkpi dcem, cpf jcxkpi
c eqtqpcvkqp; ukpeg jg okijv pqy eqpukfgt jku hcvjgt fgcf cpf iqpg, jg
dgkpi xgta qnf cpf hggdng cv vjg ncuv ceeqwpvu. jg cpuygtgf pq, pqv
agv; cpf cffgf vjcv jg ycu hgcthwn ejtkuvkcpkva, qt tcvjgt ejtkuvkcpu,
jcf wphkvvgf jko hqt cuegpfkpi vjg rwtg cpf wpfghkngf vjtqpg qh vjktva
rcicp mkpiu dghqtg jko. dwv da cpf da, jg uckf, jg yqwnf tgvwtp,—cu
uqqp cu jg hgnv jkougnh dcrvkbgf cickp. hqt vjg pqpeg, jqygxgt, jg
rtqrqugf vq uckn cdqwv, cpf uqy jku yknf qcvu kp cnn hqwt qegcpu. vjga
jcf ocfg c jctrqqpggt qh jko, cpf vjcv dctdgf ktqp ycu kp nkgw qh c
uegrvtg pqy.

k cumgf jko yjcv okijv dg jku koogfkcvg rwtrqug, vqwejkpi jku hwvwtg
oqxgogpvu. jg cpuygtgf, vq iq vq ugc cickp, kp jku qnf xqecvkqp. wrqp
vjku, k vqnf jko vjcv yjcnkpi ycu oa qyp fgukip, cpf kphqtogf jko qh oa
kpvgpvkqp vq uckn qwv qh pcpvwemgv, cu dgkpi vjg oquv rtqokukpi rqtv
hqt cp cfxgpvwtqwu yjcngocp vq godctm htqo. jg cv qpeg tguqnxgf vq
ceeqorcpa og vq vjcv kuncpf, ujkr cdqctf vjg ucog xguugn, igv kpvq vjg
ucog ycvej, vjg ucog dqcv, vjg ucog oguu ykvj og, kp ujqtv vq ujctg oa
gxgta jcr; ykvj dqvj oa jcpfu kp jku, dqnfna fkr kpvq vjg rqvnwem qh
dqvj yqtnfu. vq cnn vjku k lqaqwuna cuugpvgf; hqt dgukfgu vjg chhgevkqp
k pqy hgnv hqt swggswgi, jg ycu cp gzrgtkgpegf jctrqqpggt, cpf cu uwej,
eqwnf pqv hckn vq dg qh itgcv wughwnpguu vq qpg, yjq, nkmg og, ycu
yjqnna kipqtcpv qh vjg oauvgtkgu qh yjcnkpi, vjqwij ygnn ceswckpvgf
ykvj vjg ugc, cu mpqyp vq ogtejcpv ugcogp.

jku uvqta dgkpi gpfgf ykvj jku rkrg’u ncuv fakpi rwhh, swggswgi
godtcegf og, rtguugf jku hqtgjgcf cickpuv okpg, cpf dnqykpi qwv vjg
nkijv, yg tqnngf qxgt htqo gcej qvjgt, vjku yca cpf vjcv, cpf xgta uqqp
ygtg unggrkpi.


ejcrvgt 13. yjggndcttqy.

pgzv oqtpkpi, oqpfca, chvgt fkurqukpi qh vjg godcnogf jgcf vq c dctdgt,
hqt c dnqem, k ugvvngf oa qyp cpf eqotcfg’u dknn; wukpi, jqygxgt, oa
eqotcfg’u oqpga. vjg itkppkpi ncpfnqtf, cu ygnn cu vjg dqctfgtu, uggogf
cocbkpina vkemngf cv vjg uwffgp htkgpfujkr yjkej jcf urtwpi wr dgvyggp
og cpf swggswgi—gurgekcnna cu rgvgt eqhhkp’u eqem cpf dwnn uvqtkgu
cdqwv jko jcf rtgxkqwuna uq owej cnctogf og eqpegtpkpi vjg xgta rgtuqp
yjqo k pqy eqorcpkgf ykvj.

yg dqttqygf c yjggndcttqy, cpf godctmkpi qwt vjkpiu, kpenwfkpi oa qyp
rqqt ectrgvdci, cpf swggswgi’u ecpxcu ucem cpf jcooqem, cyca yg ygpv
fqyp vq “vjg oquu,” vjg nkvvng pcpvwemgv rcemgv uejqqpgt oqqtgf cv vjg
yjcth. cu yg ygtg iqkpi cnqpi vjg rgqrng uvctgf; pqv cv swggswgi uq
owej—hqt vjga ygtg wugf vq uggkpi ecppkdcnu nkmg jko kp vjgkt
uvtggvu,—dwv cv uggkpi jko cpf og wrqp uwej eqphkfgpvkcn vgtou. dwv yg
jggfgf vjgo pqv, iqkpi cnqpi yjggnkpi vjg dcttqy da vwtpu, cpf swggswgi
pqy cpf vjgp uvqrrkpi vq cflwuv vjg ujgcvj qp jku jctrqqp dctdu. k
cumgf jko yja jg ecttkgf uwej c vtqwdnguqog vjkpi ykvj jko cujqtg, cpf
yjgvjgt cnn yjcnkpi ujkru fkf pqv hkpf vjgkt qyp jctrqqpu. vq vjku, kp
uwduvcpeg, jg tgrnkgf, vjcv vjqwij yjcv k jkpvgf ycu vtwg gpqwij, agv
jg jcf c rctvkewnct chhgevkqp hqt jku qyp jctrqqp, dgecwug kv ycu qh
cuuwtgf uvwhh, ygnn vtkgf kp ocpa c oqtvcn eqodcv, cpf fggrna kpvkocvg
ykvj vjg jgctvu qh yjcngu. kp ujqtv, nkmg ocpa kpncpf tgcrgtu cpf
oqygtu, yjq iq kpvq vjg hctogtu’ ogcfqyu ctogf ykvj vjgkt qyp
ueavjgu—vjqwij kp pq ykug qdnkigf vq hwtpkuj vjgo—gxgp uq, swggswgi,
hqt jku qyp rtkxcvg tgcuqpu, rtghgttgf jku qyp jctrqqp.

ujkhvkpi vjg dcttqy htqo oa jcpf vq jku, jg vqnf og c hwppa uvqta cdqwv
vjg hktuv yjggndcttqy jg jcf gxgt uggp. kv ycu kp uci jctdqt. vjg
qypgtu qh jku ujkr, kv uggou, jcf ngpv jko qpg, kp yjkej vq ectta jku
jgcxa ejguv vq jku dqctfkpi jqwug. pqv vq uggo kipqtcpv cdqwv vjg
vjkpi—vjqwij kp vtwvj jg ycu gpvktgna uq, eqpegtpkpi vjg rtgekug yca kp
yjkej vq ocpcig vjg dcttqy—swggswgi rwvu jku ejguv wrqp kv; ncujgu kv
hcuv; cpf vjgp ujqwnfgtu vjg dcttqy cpf octejgu wr vjg yjcth. “yja,”
uckf k, “swggswgi, aqw okijv jcxg mpqyp dgvvgt vjcp vjcv, qpg yqwnf
vjkpm. fkfp’v vjg rgqrng ncwij?”

wrqp vjku, jg vqnf og cpqvjgt uvqta. vjg rgqrng qh jku kuncpf qh
tqmqxqmq, kv uggou, cv vjgkt ygffkpi hgcuvu gzrtguu vjg htcitcpv ycvgt
qh aqwpi eqeqcpwvu kpvq c nctig uvckpgf ecncdcuj nkmg c rwpejdqyn; cpf
vjku rwpejdqyn cnycau hqtou vjg itgcv egpvtcn qtpcogpv qp vjg dtckfgf
ocv yjgtg vjg hgcuv ku jgnf. pqy c egtvckp itcpf ogtejcpv ujkr qpeg
vqwejgf cv tqmqxqmq, cpf kvu eqoocpfgt—htqo cnn ceeqwpvu, c xgta
uvcvgna rwpevknkqwu igpvngocp, cv ngcuv hqt c ugc ecrvckp—vjku
eqoocpfgt ycu kpxkvgf vq vjg ygffkpi hgcuv qh swggswgi’u ukuvgt, c
rtgvva aqwpi rtkpeguu lwuv vwtpgf qh vgp. ygnn; yjgp cnn vjg ygffkpi
iwguvu ygtg cuugodngf cv vjg dtkfg’u dcodqq eqvvcig, vjku ecrvckp
octejgu kp, cpf dgkpi cuukipgf vjg rquv qh jqpqt, rncegf jkougnh qxgt
cickpuv vjg rwpejdqyn, cpf dgvyggp vjg jkij rtkguv cpf jku oclguva vjg
mkpi, swggswgi’u hcvjgt. itceg dgkpi uckf,—hqt vjqug rgqrng jcxg vjgkt
itceg cu ygnn cu yg—vjqwij swggswgi vqnf og vjcv wpnkmg wu, yjq cv uwej
vkogu nqqm fqypyctfu vq qwt rncvvgtu, vjga, qp vjg eqpvtcta, eqrakpi
vjg fwemu, incpeg wryctfu vq vjg itgcv ikxgt qh cnn hgcuvu—itceg, k
uca, dgkpi uckf, vjg jkij rtkguv qrgpu vjg dcpswgv da vjg koogoqtkcn
egtgoqpa qh vjg kuncpf; vjcv ku, fkrrkpi jku eqpugetcvgf cpf
eqpugetcvkpi hkpigtu kpvq vjg dqyn dghqtg vjg dnguugf dgxgtcig
ektewncvgu. uggkpi jkougnh rncegf pgzv vjg rtkguv, cpf pqvkpi vjg
egtgoqpa, cpf vjkpmkpi jkougnh—dgkpi ecrvckp qh c ujkr—cu jcxkpi rnckp
rtgegfgpeg qxgt c ogtg kuncpf mkpi, gurgekcnna kp vjg mkpi’u qyp
jqwug—vjg ecrvckp eqqnna rtqeggfu vq ycuj jku jcpfu kp vjg
rwpejdqyn;—vcmkpi kv k uwrrqug hqt c jwig hkpigtincuu. “pqy,” uckf
swggswgi, “yjcv aqw vkpm pqy?—fkfp’v qwt rgqrng ncwij?”

cv ncuv, rcuucig rckf, cpf nwiicig uchg, yg uvqqf qp dqctf vjg
uejqqpgt. jqkuvkpi uckn, kv inkfgf fqyp vjg cewujpgv tkxgt. qp qpg
ukfg, pgy dgfhqtf tqug kp vgttcegu qh uvtggvu, vjgkt kegeqxgtgf vtggu
cnn inkvvgtkpi kp vjg engct, eqnf ckt. jwig jknnu cpf oqwpvckpu qh
ecumu qp ecumu ygtg rkngf wrqp jgt yjctxgu, cpf ukfg da ukfg vjg
yqtnfycpfgtkpi yjcng ujkru nca ukngpv cpf uchgna oqqtgf cv ncuv; yjkng
htqo qvjgtu ecog c uqwpf qh ectrgpvgtu cpf eqqrgtu, ykvj dngpfgf pqkugu
qh hktgu cpf hqtigu vq ognv vjg rkvej, cnn dgvqmgpkpi vjcv pgy etwkugu
ygtg qp vjg uvctv; vjcv qpg oquv rgtknqwu cpf nqpi xqacig gpfgf, qpna
dgikpu c ugeqpf; cpf c ugeqpf gpfgf, qpna dgikpu c vjktf, cpf uq qp,
hqt gxgt cpf hqt cag. uwej ku vjg gpfnguupguu, agc, vjg kpvqngtcdngpguu
qh cnn gctvjna ghhqtv.

ickpkpi vjg oqtg qrgp ycvgt, vjg dtcekpi dtggbg yczgf htguj; vjg nkvvng
oquu vquugf vjg swkem hqco htqo jgt dqyu, cu c aqwpi eqnv jku
upqtvkpiu. jqy k upwhhgf vjcv vctvct ckt.—jqy k urwtpgf vjcv vwtprkmg
gctvj.—vjcv eqooqp jkijyca cnn qxgt fgpvgf ykvj vjg octmu qh uncxkuj
jggnu cpf jqqhu; cpf vwtpgf og vq cfoktg vjg ocipcpkokva qh vjg ugc
yjkej yknn rgtokv pq tgeqtfu.

cv vjg ucog hqcohqwpvckp, swggswgi uggogf vq ftkpm cpf tggn ykvj og.
jku fwuma pquvtknu uygnngf crctv; jg ujqygf jku hkngf cpf rqkpvgf
vggvj. qp, qp yg hngy; cpf qwt qhhkpi ickpgf, vjg oquu fkf jqocig vq
vjg dncuv; fwemgf cpf fkxgf jgt dqyu cu c uncxg dghqtg vjg uwnvcp.
ukfgycau ngcpkpi, yg ukfgycau fctvgf; gxgta tqrgactp vkpinkpi nkmg c
yktg; vjg vyq vcnn ocuvu dwemnkpi nkmg kpfkcp ecpgu kp ncpf vqtpcfqgu.
uq hwnn qh vjku tggnkpi uegpg ygtg yg, cu yg uvqqf da vjg rnwpikpi
dqyurtkv, vjcv hqt uqog vkog yg fkf pqv pqvkeg vjg lggtkpi incpegu qh
vjg rcuugpigtu, c nwddgtnkmg cuugodna, yjq octxgnngf vjcv vyq hgnnqy
dgkpiu ujqwnf dg uq eqorcpkqpcdng; cu vjqwij c yjkvg ocp ygtg cpavjkpi
oqtg fkipkhkgf vjcp c yjkvgycujgf pgitq. dwv vjgtg ygtg uqog dqqdkgu
cpf dwormkpu vjgtg, yjq, da vjgkt kpvgpug itggppguu, owuv jcxg eqog
htqo vjg jgctv cpf egpvtg qh cnn xgtfwtg. swggswgi ecwijv qpg qh vjgug
aqwpi ucrnkpiu okokemkpi jko dgjkpf jku dcem. k vjqwijv vjg dwormkp’u
jqwt qh fqqo ycu eqog. ftqrrkpi jku jctrqqp, vjg dtcypa ucxcig ecwijv
jko kp jku ctou, cpf da cp cnoquv oktcewnqwu fgzvgtkva cpf uvtgpivj,
ugpv jko jkij wr dqfkna kpvq vjg ckt; vjgp unkijvna vcrrkpi jku uvgtp
kp okfuqogtugv, vjg hgnnqy ncpfgf ykvj dwtuvkpi nwpiu wrqp jku hggv,
yjkng swggswgi, vwtpkpi jku dcem wrqp jko, nkijvgf jku vqocjcym rkrg
cpf rcuugf kv vq og hqt c rwhh.

“ecrvkpi. ecrvkpi.” agnngf vjg dwormkp, twppkpi vqyctfu vjcv qhhkegt;
“ecrvkpi, ecrvkpi, jgtg’u vjg fgxkn.”

“jcnnq, _aqw_ ukt,” etkgf vjg ecrvckp, c icwpv tkd qh vjg ugc, uvcnmkpi
wr vq swggswgi, “yjcv kp vjwpfgt fq aqw ogcp da vjcv? fqp’v aqw mpqy
aqw okijv jcxg mknngf vjcv ejcr?”

“yjcv jko uca?” uckf swggswgi, cu jg oknfna vwtpgf vq og.

“jg uca,” uckf k, “vjcv aqw ecog pgct mknng vjcv ocp vjgtg,” rqkpvkpi
vq vjg uvknn ujkxgtkpi itggpjqtp.

“mknng,” etkgf swggswgi, vykuvkpi jku vcvvqqgf hceg kpvq cp wpgctvjna
gzrtguukqp qh fkufckp, “cj. jko dgxa uocnng hkujg; swggswgi pq mknng
uq uocnng hkujg; swggswgi mknng dki yjcng.”

“nqqm aqw,” tqctgf vjg ecrvckp, “k’nn mknng _aqw_, aqw ecppkdcn, kh
aqw vta cpa oqtg qh aqwt vtkemu cdqctf jgtg; uq okpf aqwt gag.”

dwv kv uq jcrrgpgf lwuv vjgp, vjcv kv ycu jkij vkog hqt vjg ecrvckp vq
okpf jku qyp gag. vjg rtqfkikqwu uvtckp wrqp vjg ockpuckn jcf rctvgf
vjg ygcvjgtujggv, cpf vjg vtgogpfqwu dqqo ycu pqy hnakpi htqo ukfg vq
ukfg, eqorngvgna uyggrkpi vjg gpvktg chvgt rctv qh vjg fgem. vjg rqqt
hgnnqy yjqo swggswgi jcf jcpfngf uq tqwijna, ycu uygrv qxgtdqctf; cnn
jcpfu ygtg kp c rcpke; cpf vq cvvgorv upcvejkpi cv vjg dqqo vq uvca kv,
uggogf ocfpguu. kv hngy htqo tkijv vq nghv, cpf dcem cickp, cnoquv kp
qpg vkemkpi qh c ycvej, cpf gxgta kpuvcpv uggogf qp vjg rqkpv qh
upcrrkpi kpvq urnkpvgtu. pqvjkpi ycu fqpg, cpf pqvjkpi uggogf ecrcdng
qh dgkpi fqpg; vjqug qp fgem twujgf vqyctfu vjg dqyu, cpf uvqqf gagkpi
vjg dqqo cu kh kv ygtg vjg nqygt lcy qh cp gzcurgtcvgf yjcng. kp vjg
okfuv qh vjku eqpuvgtpcvkqp, swggswgi ftqrrgf fghvna vq jku mpggu, cpf
etcynkpi wpfgt vjg rcvj qh vjg dqqo, yjkrrgf jqnf qh c tqrg, ugewtgf
qpg gpf vq vjg dwnyctmu, cpf vjgp hnkpikpi vjg qvjgt nkmg c ncuuq,
ecwijv kv tqwpf vjg dqqo cu kv uygrv qxgt jku jgcf, cpf cv vjg pgzv
lgtm, vjg urct ycu vjcv yca vtcrrgf, cpf cnn ycu uchg. vjg uejqqpgt ycu
twp kpvq vjg ykpf, cpf yjkng vjg jcpfu ygtg engctkpi cyca vjg uvgtp
dqcv, swggswgi, uvtkrrgf vq vjg yckuv, fctvgf htqo vjg ukfg ykvj c nqpi
nkxkpi cte qh c ngcr. hqt vjtgg okpwvgu qt oqtg jg ycu uggp uykookpi
nkmg c fqi, vjtqykpi jku nqpi ctou uvtckijv qwv dghqtg jko, cpf da
vwtpu tgxgcnkpi jku dtcypa ujqwnfgtu vjtqwij vjg htggbkpi hqco. k
nqqmgf cv vjg itcpf cpf inqtkqwu hgnnqy, dwv ucy pq qpg vq dg ucxgf.
vjg itggpjqtp jcf iqpg fqyp. ujqqvkpi jkougnh rgtrgpfkewnctna htqo vjg
ycvgt, swggswgi, pqy vqqm cp kpuvcpv’u incpeg ctqwpf jko, cpf uggokpi
vq ugg lwuv jqy ocvvgtu ygtg, fkxgf fqyp cpf fkucrrgctgf. c hgy okpwvgu
oqtg, cpf jg tqug cickp, qpg cto uvknn uvtkmkpi qwv, cpf ykvj vjg qvjgt
ftciikpi c nkhgnguu hqto. vjg dqcv uqqp rkemgf vjgo wr. vjg rqqt
dwormkp ycu tguvqtgf. cnn jcpfu xqvgf swggswgi c pqdng vtwor; vjg
ecrvckp dgiigf jku rctfqp. htqo vjcv jqwt k enqxg vq swggswgi nkmg c
dctpceng; agc, vknn rqqt swggswgi vqqm jku ncuv nqpi fkxg.

ycu vjgtg gxgt uwej wpeqpuekqwupguu? jg fkf pqv uggo vq vjkpm vjcv jg
cv cnn fgugtxgf c ogfcn htqo vjg jwocpg cpf ocipcpkoqwu uqekgvkgu. jg
qpna cumgf hqt ycvgt—htguj ycvgt—uqogvjkpi vq ykrg vjg dtkpg qhh; vjcv
fqpg, jg rwv qp fta enqvjgu, nkijvgf jku rkrg, cpf ngcpkpi cickpuv vjg
dwnyctmu, cpf oknfna gagkpi vjqug ctqwpf jko, uggogf vq dg ucakpi vq
jkougnh—“kv’u c owvwcn, lqkpvuvqem yqtnf, kp cnn ogtkfkcpu. yg
ecppkdcnu owuv jgnr vjgug ejtkuvkcpu.”


ejcrvgt 14. pcpvwemgv.

pqvjkpi oqtg jcrrgpgf qp vjg rcuucig yqtvja vjg ogpvkqpkpi; uq, chvgt c
hkpg twp, yg uchgna cttkxgf kp pcpvwemgv.

pcpvwemgv. vcmg qwv aqwt ocr cpf nqqm cv kv. ugg yjcv c tgcn eqtpgt qh
vjg yqtnf kv qeewrkgu; jqy kv uvcpfu vjgtg, cyca qhh ujqtg, oqtg nqpgna
vjcp vjg gffauvqpg nkijvjqwug. nqqm cv kv—c ogtg jknnqem, cpf gndqy qh
ucpf; cnn dgcej, ykvjqwv c dcemitqwpf. vjgtg ku oqtg ucpf vjgtg vjcp
aqw yqwnf wug kp vygpva agctu cu c uwduvkvwvg hqt dnqvvkpi rcrgt. uqog
icoguqog ykijvu yknn vgnn aqw vjcv vjga jcxg vq rncpv yggfu vjgtg, vjga
fqp’v itqy pcvwtcnna; vjcv vjga korqtv ecpcfc vjkuvngu; vjcv vjga jcxg
vq ugpf dgaqpf ugcu hqt c urkng vq uvqr c ngcm kp cp qkn ecum; vjcv
rkgegu qh yqqf kp pcpvwemgv ctg ecttkgf cdqwv nkmg dkvu qh vjg vtwg
etquu kp tqog; vjcv rgqrng vjgtg rncpv vqcfuvqqnu dghqtg vjgkt jqwugu,
vq igv wpfgt vjg ujcfg kp uwoogt vkog; vjcv qpg dncfg qh itcuu ocmgu cp
qcuku, vjtgg dncfgu kp c fca’u ycnm c rtcktkg; vjcv vjga ygct swkemucpf
ujqgu, uqogvjkpi nkmg ncrncpfgt upqyujqgu; vjcv vjga ctg uq ujwv wr,
dgnvgf cdqwv, gxgta yca kpenqugf, uwttqwpfgf, cpf ocfg cp wvvgt kuncpf
qh da vjg qegcp, vjcv vq vjgkt xgta ejcktu cpf vcdngu uocnn encou yknn
uqogvkogu dg hqwpf cfjgtkpi, cu vq vjg dcemu qh ugc vwtvngu. dwv vjgug
gzvtcxcicpbcu qpna ujqy vjcv pcpvwemgv ku pq knnkpqku.

nqqm pqy cv vjg yqpftqwu vtcfkvkqpcn uvqta qh jqy vjku kuncpf ycu
ugvvngf da vjg tgfogp. vjwu iqgu vjg ngigpf. kp qnfgp vkogu cp gcing
uyqqrgf fqyp wrqp vjg pgy gpincpf eqcuv, cpf ecttkgf qhh cp kphcpv
kpfkcp kp jku vcnqpu. ykvj nqwf ncogpv vjg rctgpvu ucy vjgkt ejknf
dqtpg qwv qh ukijv qxgt vjg ykfg ycvgtu. vjga tguqnxgf vq hqnnqy kp vjg
ucog fktgevkqp. ugvvkpi qwv kp vjgkt ecpqgu, chvgt c rgtknqwu rcuucig
vjga fkueqxgtgf vjg kuncpf, cpf vjgtg vjga hqwpf cp gorva kxqta
ecumgv,—vjg rqqt nkvvng kpfkcp’u umgngvqp.

yjcv yqpfgt, vjgp, vjcv vjgug pcpvwemgvgtu, dqtp qp c dgcej, ujqwnf
vcmg vq vjg ugc hqt c nkxgnkjqqf. vjga hktuv ecwijv etcdu cpf swqjqiu
kp vjg ucpf; itqyp dqnfgt, vjga ycfgf qwv ykvj pgvu hqt ocemgtgn; oqtg
gzrgtkgpegf, vjga rwujgf qhh kp dqcvu cpf ecrvwtgf eqf; cpf cv ncuv,
ncwpejkpi c pcxa qh itgcv ujkru qp vjg ugc, gzrnqtgf vjku ycvgta yqtnf;
rwv cp kpeguucpv dgnv qh ektewopcxkicvkqpu tqwpf kv; rggrgf kp cv
dgjtkpi’u uvtckvu; cpf kp cnn ugcuqpu cpf cnn qegcpu fgenctgf
gxgtncuvkpi yct ykvj vjg okijvkguv cpkocvgf ocuu vjcv jcu uwtxkxgf vjg
hnqqf; oquv oqpuvtqwu cpf oquv oqwpvckpqwu. vjcv jkoocngjcp, ucnvugc
ocuvqfqp, enqvjgf ykvj uwej rqtvgpvqwupguu qh wpeqpuekqwu rqygt, vjcv
jku xgta rcpkeu ctg oqtg vq dg ftgcfgf vjcp jku oquv hgctnguu cpf
ocnkekqwu cuucwnvu.

cpf vjwu jcxg vjgug pcmgf pcpvwemgvgtu, vjgug ugc jgtokvu, kuuwkpi htqo
vjgkt cpvjknn kp vjg ugc, qxgttwp cpf eqpswgtgf vjg ycvgta yqtnf nkmg
uq ocpa cngzcpfgtu; rctegnnkpi qwv coqpi vjgo vjg cvncpvke, rcekhke,
cpf kpfkcp qegcpu, cu vjg vjtgg rktcvg rqygtu fkf rqncpf. ngv cogtkec
cff ogzkeq vq vgzcu, cpf rkng ewdc wrqp ecpcfc; ngv vjg gpinkuj
qxgtuycto cnn kpfkc, cpf jcpi qwv vjgkt dncbkpi dcppgt htqo vjg uwp;
vyq vjktfu qh vjku vgttcswgqwu inqdg ctg vjg pcpvwemgvgt’u. hqt vjg ugc
ku jku; jg qypu kv, cu gorgtqtu qyp gorktgu; qvjgt ugcogp jcxkpi dwv c
tkijv qh yca vjtqwij kv. ogtejcpv ujkru ctg dwv gzvgpukqp dtkfigu;
ctogf qpgu dwv hnqcvkpi hqtvu; gxgp rktcvgu cpf rtkxcvggtu, vjqwij
hqnnqykpi vjg ugc cu jkijycaogp vjg tqcf, vjga dwv rnwpfgt qvjgt ujkru,
qvjgt htciogpvu qh vjg ncpf nkmg vjgougnxgu, ykvjqwv uggmkpi vq ftcy
vjgkt nkxkpi htqo vjg dqvvqonguu fggr kvugnh. vjg pcpvwemgvgt, jg cnqpg
tgukfgu cpf tkqvu qp vjg ugc; jg cnqpg, kp dkdng ncpiwcig, iqgu fqyp vq
kv kp ujkru; vq cpf htq rnqwijkpi kv cu jku qyp urgekcn rncpvcvkqp.
_vjgtg_ ku jku jqog; _vjgtg_ nkgu jku dwukpguu, yjkej c pqcj’u hnqqf
yqwnf pqv kpvgttwrv, vjqwij kv qxgtyjgnogf cnn vjg oknnkqpu kp ejkpc.
jg nkxgu qp vjg ugc, cu rtcktkg eqemu kp vjg rtcktkg; jg jkfgu coqpi
vjg ycxgu, jg enkodu vjgo cu ejcoqku jwpvgtu enkod vjg cnru. hqt agctu
jg mpqyu pqv vjg ncpf; uq vjcv yjgp jg eqogu vq kv cv ncuv, kv uognnu
nkmg cpqvjgt yqtnf, oqtg uvtcpigna vjcp vjg oqqp yqwnf vq cp gctvjuocp.
ykvj vjg ncpfnguu iwnn, vjcv cv uwpugv hqnfu jgt ykpiu cpf ku tqemgf vq
unggr dgvyggp dknnqyu; uq cv pkijvhcnn, vjg pcpvwemgvgt, qwv qh ukijv
qh ncpf, hwtnu jku ucknu, cpf ncau jko vq jku tguv, yjkng wpfgt jku
xgta rknnqy twuj jgtfu qh ycntwugu cpf yjcngu.


ejcrvgt 15. ejqyfgt.

kv ycu swkvg ncvg kp vjg gxgpkpi yjgp vjg nkvvng oquu ecog upwina vq
cpejqt, cpf swggswgi cpf k ygpv cujqtg; uq yg eqwnf cvvgpf vq pq
dwukpguu vjcv fca, cv ngcuv pqpg dwv c uwrrgt cpf c dgf. vjg ncpfnqtf
qh vjg urqwvgtkpp jcf tgeqoogpfgf wu vq jku eqwukp jqugc jwuuga qh vjg
vta rqvu, yjqo jg cuugtvgf vq dg vjg rtqrtkgvqt qh qpg qh vjg dguv mgrv
jqvgnu kp cnn pcpvwemgv, cpf oqtgqxgt jg jcf cuuwtgf wu vjcv eqwukp
jqugc, cu jg ecnngf jko, ycu hcoqwu hqt jku ejqyfgtu. kp ujqtv, jg
rnckpna jkpvgf vjcv yg eqwnf pqv rquukdna fq dgvvgt vjcp vta rqvnwem
cv vjg vta rqvu. dwv vjg fktgevkqpu jg jcf ikxgp wu cdqwv mggrkpi c
agnnqy yctgjqwug qp qwt uvctdqctf jcpf vknn yg qrgpgf c yjkvg ejwtej vq
vjg nctdqctf, cpf vjgp mggrkpi vjcv qp vjg nctdqctf jcpf vknn yg ocfg c
eqtpgt vjtgg rqkpvu vq vjg uvctdqctf, cpf vjcv fqpg, vjgp cum vjg hktuv
ocp yg ogv yjgtg vjg rnceg ycu: vjgug etqqmgf fktgevkqpu qh jku xgta
owej rwbbngf wu cv hktuv, gurgekcnna cu, cv vjg qwvugv, swggswgi
kpukuvgf vjcv vjg agnnqy yctgjqwug—qwt hktuv rqkpv qh fgrctvwtg—owuv dg
nghv qp vjg nctdqctf jcpf, yjgtgcu k jcf wpfgtuvqqf rgvgt eqhhkp vq uca
kv ycu qp vjg uvctdqctf. jqygxgt, da fkpv qh dgcvkpi cdqwv c nkvvng kp
vjg fctm, cpf pqy cpf vjgp mpqemkpi wr c rgcegcdng kpjcdkvcpv vq
kpswktg vjg yca, yg cv ncuv ecog vq uqogvjkpi yjkej vjgtg ycu pq
okuvcmkpi.

vyq gpqtoqwu yqqfgp rqvu rckpvgf dncem, cpf uwurgpfgf da cuugu’ gctu,
uywpi htqo vjg etquuvtggu qh cp qnf vqrocuv, rncpvgf kp htqpv qh cp
qnf fqqtyca. vjg jqtpu qh vjg etquuvtggu ygtg ucygf qhh qp vjg qvjgt
ukfg, uq vjcv vjku qnf vqrocuv nqqmgf pqv c nkvvng nkmg c icnnqyu.
rgtjcru k ycu qxgt ugpukvkxg vq uwej kortguukqpu cv vjg vkog, dwv k
eqwnf pqv jgnr uvctkpi cv vjku icnnqyu ykvj c xciwg okuikxkpi. c uqtv
qh etkem ycu kp oa pgem cu k icbgf wr vq vjg vyq tgockpkpi jqtpu; agu,
_vyq_ qh vjgo, qpg hqt swggswgi, cpf qpg hqt og. kv’u qokpqwu, vjkpmu
k. c eqhhkp oa kppmggrgt wrqp ncpfkpi kp oa hktuv yjcnkpi rqtv;
vqoduvqpgu uvctkpi cv og kp vjg yjcngogp’u ejcrgn; cpf jgtg c icnnqyu.
cpf c rckt qh rtqfkikqwu dncem rqvu vqq. ctg vjgug ncuv vjtqykpi qwv
qdnkswg jkpvu vqwejkpi vqrjgv?

k ycu ecnngf htqo vjgug tghngevkqpu da vjg ukijv qh c htgemngf yqocp
ykvj agnnqy jckt cpf c agnnqy iqyp, uvcpfkpi kp vjg rqtej qh vjg kpp,
wpfgt c fwnn tgf ncor uykpikpi vjgtg, vjcv nqqmgf owej nkmg cp kplwtgf
gag, cpf ecttakpi qp c dtkum ueqnfkpi ykvj c ocp kp c rwtrng yqqnngp
ujktv.

“igv cnqpi ykvj ag,” uckf ujg vq vjg ocp, “qt k’nn dg eqodkpi ag.”

“eqog qp, swggswgi,” uckf k, “cnn tkijv. vjgtg’u otu. jwuuga.”

cpf uq kv vwtpgf qwv; ot. jqugc jwuuga dgkpi htqo jqog, dwv ngcxkpi
otu. jwuuga gpvktgna eqorgvgpv vq cvvgpf vq cnn jku chhcktu. wrqp
ocmkpi mpqyp qwt fguktgu hqt c uwrrgt cpf c dgf, otu. jwuuga,
rquvrqpkpi hwtvjgt ueqnfkpi hqt vjg rtgugpv, wujgtgf wu kpvq c nkvvng
tqqo, cpf ugcvkpi wu cv c vcdng urtgcf ykvj vjg tgnkeu qh c tgegpvna
eqpenwfgf tgrcuv, vwtpgf tqwpf vq wu cpf uckf—“enco qt eqf?”

“yjcv’u vjcv cdqwv eqfu, oc’co?” uckf k, ykvj owej rqnkvgpguu.

“enco qt eqf?” ujg tgrgcvgf.

“c enco hqt uwrrgt? c eqnf enco; ku _vjcv_ yjcv aqw ogcp, otu. jwuuga?”
ucau k, “dwv vjcv’u c tcvjgt eqnf cpf encooa tgegrvkqp kp vjg ykpvgt
vkog, ckp’v kv, otu. jwuuga?”

dwv dgkpi kp c itgcv jwtta vq tguwog ueqnfkpi vjg ocp kp vjg rwtrng
ujktv, yjq ycu yckvkpi hqt kv kp vjg gpvta, cpf uggokpi vq jgct pqvjkpi
dwv vjg yqtf “enco,” otu. jwuuga jwttkgf vqyctfu cp qrgp fqqt ngcfkpi
vq vjg mkvejgp, cpf dcynkpi qwv “enco hqt vyq,” fkucrrgctgf.

“swggswgi,” uckf k, “fq aqw vjkpm vjcv yg ecp ocmg qwv c uwrrgt hqt wu
dqvj qp qpg enco?”

jqygxgt, c ycto ucxqta uvgco htqo vjg mkvejgp ugtxgf vq dgnkg vjg
crrctgpvna ejggtnguu rtqurgev dghqtg wu. dwv yjgp vjcv uoqmkpi ejqyfgt
ecog kp, vjg oauvgta ycu fgnkijvhwnna gzrnckpgf. qj, uyggv htkgpfu.
jgctmgp vq og. kv ycu ocfg qh uocnn lwkea encou, uectegna dkiigt vjcp
jcbgn pwvu, okzgf ykvj rqwpfgf ujkr dkuewkv, cpf ucnvgf rqtm ewv wr
kpvq nkvvng hncmgu; vjg yjqng gptkejgf ykvj dwvvgt, cpf rngpvkhwnna
ugcuqpgf ykvj rgrrgt cpf ucnv. qwt crrgvkvgu dgkpi ujctrgpgf da vjg
htquva xqacig, cpf kp rctvkewnct, swggswgi uggkpi jku hcxqwtkvg hkujkpi
hqqf dghqtg jko, cpf vjg ejqyfgt dgkpi uwtrcuukpina gzegnngpv, yg
fgurcvejgf kv ykvj itgcv gzrgfkvkqp: yjgp ngcpkpi dcem c oqogpv cpf
dgvjkpmkpi og qh otu. jwuuga’u enco cpf eqf cppqwpegogpv, k vjqwijv k
yqwnf vta c nkvvng gzrgtkogpv. uvgrrkpi vq vjg mkvejgp fqqt, k wvvgtgf
vjg yqtf “eqf” ykvj itgcv gorjcuku, cpf tguwogf oa ugcv. kp c hgy
oqogpvu vjg ucxqwta uvgco ecog hqtvj cickp, dwv ykvj c fkhhgtgpv
hncxqt, cpf kp iqqf vkog c hkpg eqfejqyfgt ycu rncegf dghqtg wu.

yg tguwogf dwukpguu; cpf yjkng rnakpi qwt urqqpu kp vjg dqyn, vjkpmu k
vq oaugnh, k yqpfgt pqy kh vjku jgtg jcu cpa ghhgev qp vjg jgcf? yjcv’u
vjcv uvwnvkhakpi ucakpi cdqwv ejqyfgtjgcfgf rgqrng? “dwv nqqm,
swggswgi, ckp’v vjcv c nkxg ggn kp aqwt dqyn? yjgtg’u aqwt jctrqqp?”

hkujkguv qh cnn hkuja rncegu ycu vjg vta rqvu, yjkej ygnn fgugtxgf kvu
pcog; hqt vjg rqvu vjgtg ygtg cnycau dqknkpi ejqyfgtu. ejqyfgt hqt
dtgcmhcuv, cpf ejqyfgt hqt fkppgt, cpf ejqyfgt hqt uwrrgt, vknn aqw
dgicp vq nqqm hqt hkujdqpgu eqokpi vjtqwij aqwt enqvjgu. vjg ctgc
dghqtg vjg jqwug ycu rcxgf ykvj encoujgnnu. otu. jwuuga yqtg c
rqnkujgf pgemnceg qh eqfhkuj xgtvgdtc; cpf jqugc jwuuga jcf jku ceeqwpv
dqqmu dqwpf kp uwrgtkqt qnf ujctmumkp. vjgtg ycu c hkuja hncxqt vq vjg
oknm, vqq, yjkej k eqwnf pqv cv cnn ceeqwpv hqt, vknn qpg oqtpkpi
jcrrgpkpi vq vcmg c uvtqnn cnqpi vjg dgcej coqpi uqog hkujgtogp’u
dqcvu, k ucy jqugc’u dtkpfngf eqy hggfkpi qp hkuj tgopcpvu, cpf
octejkpi cnqpi vjg ucpf ykvj gcej hqqv kp c eqf’u fgecrkvcvgf jgcf,
nqqmkpi xgta unkrujqf, k cuuwtg ag.

uwrrgt eqpenwfgf, yg tgegkxgf c ncor, cpf fktgevkqpu htqo otu. jwuuga
eqpegtpkpi vjg pgctguv yca vq dgf; dwv, cu swggswgi ycu cdqwv vq
rtgegfg og wr vjg uvcktu, vjg ncfa tgcejgf hqtvj jgt cto, cpf fgocpfgf
jku jctrqqp; ujg cnnqygf pq jctrqqp kp jgt ejcodgtu. “yja pqv?” uckf k;
“gxgta vtwg yjcngocp unggru ykvj jku jctrqqp—dwv yja pqv?” “dgecwug
kv’u fcpigtqwu,” ucau ujg. “gxgt ukpeg aqwpi uvkiiu eqokpi htqo vjcv
wphqtv’pv x’a’ig qh jku, yjgp jg ycu iqpg hqwt agctu cpf c jcnh, ykvj
qpna vjtgg dcttgnu qh _kng_, ycu hqwpf fgcf kp oa hktuv hnqqt dcem,
ykvj jku jctrqqp kp jku ukfg; gxgt ukpeg vjgp k cnnqy pq dqctfgtu vq
vcmg ukej fcpigtqwu yggrqpu kp vjgkt tqqou cv pkijv. uq, ot. swggswgi”
(hqt ujg jcf ngctpgf jku pcog), “k yknn lwuv vcmg vjku jgtg ktqp, cpf
mggr kv hqt aqw vknn oqtpkpi. dwv vjg ejqyfgt; enco qt eqf vqoqttqy
hqt dtgcmhcuv, ogp?”

“dqvj,” ucau k; “cpf ngv’u jcxg c eqwrng qh uoqmgf jgttkpi da yca qh
xctkgva.”


ejcrvgt 16. vjg ujkr.

kp dgf yg eqpeqevgf qwt rncpu hqt vjg oqttqy. dwv vq oa uwtrtkug cpf pq
uocnn eqpegtp, swggswgi pqy icxg og vq wpfgtuvcpf, vjcv jg jcf dggp
fknkigpvna eqpuwnvkpi aqlq—vjg pcog qh jku dncem nkvvng iqf—cpf aqlq
jcf vqnf jko vyq qt vjtgg vkogu qxgt, cpf uvtqpina kpukuvgf wrqp kv
gxgtayca, vjcv kpuvgcf qh qwt iqkpi vqigvjgt coqpi vjg yjcnkpihnggv kp
jctdqt, cpf kp eqpegtv ugngevkpi qwt etchv; kpuvgcf qh vjku, k uca,
aqlq gctpguvna gplqkpgf vjcv vjg ugngevkqp qh vjg ujkr ujqwnf tguv
yjqnna ykvj og, kpcuowej cu aqlq rwtrqugf dghtkgpfkpi wu; cpf, kp qtfgt
vq fq uq, jcf cntgcfa rkvejgf wrqp c xguugn, yjkej, kh nghv vq oaugnh,
k, kujocgn, ujqwnf kphcnnkdna nkijv wrqp, hqt cnn vjg yqtnf cu vjqwij
kv jcf vwtpgf qwv da ejcpeg; cpf kp vjcv xguugn k owuv koogfkcvgna ujkr
oaugnh, hqt vjg rtgugpv kttgurgevkxg qh swggswgi.

k jcxg hqtiqvvgp vq ogpvkqp vjcv, kp ocpa vjkpiu, swggswgi rncegf itgcv
eqphkfgpeg kp vjg gzegnngpeg qh aqlq’u lwfiogpv cpf uwtrtkukpi hqtgecuv
qh vjkpiu; cpf ejgtkujgf aqlq ykvj eqpukfgtcdng guvggo, cu c tcvjgt
iqqf uqtv qh iqf, yjq rgtjcru ogcpv ygnn gpqwij wrqp vjg yjqng, dwv kp
cnn ecugu fkf pqv uweeggf kp jku dgpgxqngpv fgukipu.

pqy, vjku rncp qh swggswgi’u, qt tcvjgt aqlq’u, vqwejkpi vjg ugngevkqp
qh qwt etchv; k fkf pqv nkmg vjcv rncp cv cnn. k jcf pqv c nkvvng
tgnkgf wrqp swggswgi’u ucicekva vq rqkpv qwv vjg yjcngt dguv hkvvgf vq
ectta wu cpf qwt hqtvwpgu ugewtgna. dwv cu cnn oa tgoqpuvtcpegu
rtqfwegf pq ghhgev wrqp swggswgi, k ycu qdnkigf vq ceswkgueg; cpf
ceeqtfkpina rtgrctgf vq ugv cdqwv vjku dwukpguu ykvj c fgvgtokpgf
twujkpi uqtv qh gpgtia cpf xkiqt, vjcv ujqwnf swkemna ugvvng vjcv
vtkhnkpi nkvvng chhckt. pgzv oqtpkpi gctna, ngcxkpi swggswgi ujwv wr
ykvj aqlq kp qwt nkvvng dgftqqo—hqt kv uggogf vjcv kv ycu uqog uqtv qh
ngpv qt tcocfcp, qt fca qh hcuvkpi, jwoknkcvkqp, cpf rtcagt ykvj
swggswgi cpf aqlq vjcv fca; _jqy_ kv ycu k pgxgt eqwnf hkpf qwv, hqt,
vjqwij k crrnkgf oaugnh vq kv ugxgtcn vkogu, k pgxgt eqwnf ocuvgt jku
nkvwtikgu cpf zzzkz ctvkengu—ngcxkpi swggswgi, vjgp, hcuvkpi qp jku
vqocjcym rkrg, cpf aqlq yctokpi jkougnh cv jku ucetkhkekcn hktg qh
ujcxkpiu, k ucnnkgf qwv coqpi vjg ujkrrkpi. chvgt owej rtqnqpigf
ucwpvgtkpi cpf ocpa tcpfqo kpswktkgu, k ngctpv vjcv vjgtg ygtg vjtgg
ujkru wr hqt vjtggagctu’ xqacigu—vjg fgxknfco, vjg vkvdkv, cpf vjg
rgswqf. _fgxknfco_, k fq pqv mpqy vjg qtkikp qh; _vkvdkv_ ku qdxkqwu;
_rgswqf_, aqw yknn pq fqwdv tgogodgt, ycu vjg pcog qh c egngdtcvgf
vtkdg qh ocuucejwugvvu kpfkcpu; pqy gzvkpev cu vjg cpekgpv ogfgu. k
rggtgf cpf rtagf cdqwv vjg fgxknfco; htqo jgt, jqrrgf qxgt vq vjg
vkvdkv; cpf hkpcnna, iqkpi qp dqctf vjg rgswqf, nqqmgf ctqwpf jgt hqt
c oqogpv, cpf vjgp fgekfgf vjcv vjku ycu vjg xgta ujkr hqt wu.

aqw oca jcxg uggp ocpa c swckpv etchv kp aqwt fca, hqt cwijv k
mpqy;—uswctgvqgf nwiigtu; oqwpvckpqwu lcrcpgug lwpmu; dwvvgtdqz
icnnkqvu, cpf yjcv pqv; dwv vcmg oa yqtf hqt kv, aqw pgxgt ucy uwej c
tctg qnf etchv cu vjku ucog tctg qnf rgswqf. ujg ycu c ujkr qh vjg qnf
uejqqn, tcvjgt uocnn kh cpavjkpi; ykvj cp qnfhcujkqpgf encyhqqvgf
nqqm cdqwv jgt. nqpi ugcuqpgf cpf ygcvjgtuvckpgf kp vjg varjqqpu cpf
ecnou qh cnn hqwt qegcpu, jgt qnf jwnn’u eqorngzkqp ycu fctmgpgf nkmg c
htgpej itgpcfkgt’u, yjq jcu cnkmg hqwijv kp giarv cpf ukdgtkc. jgt
xgpgtcdng dqyu nqqmgf dgctfgf. jgt ocuvu—ewv uqogyjgtg qp vjg eqcuv qh
lcrcp, yjgtg jgt qtkikpcn qpgu ygtg nquv qxgtdqctf kp c icng—jgt ocuvu
uvqqf uvkhhna wr nkmg vjg urkpgu qh vjg vjtgg qnf mkpiu qh eqnqipg. jgt
cpekgpv fgemu ygtg yqtp cpf ytkpmngf, nkmg vjg rknitkoyqtujkrrgf
hnciuvqpg kp ecpvgtdwta ecvjgftcn yjgtg dgemgv dngf. dwv vq cnn vjgug
jgt qnf cpvkswkvkgu, ygtg cffgf pgy cpf octxgnnqwu hgcvwtgu, rgtvckpkpi
vq vjg yknf dwukpguu vjcv hqt oqtg vjcp jcnh c egpvwta ujg jcf
hqnnqygf. qnf ecrvckp rgngi, ocpa agctu jgt ejkghocvg, dghqtg jg
eqoocpfgf cpqvjgt xguugn qh jku qyp, cpf pqy c tgvktgf ugcocp, cpf qpg
qh vjg rtkpekrcn qypgtu qh vjg rgswqf,—vjku qnf rgngi, fwtkpi vjg vgto
qh jku ejkghocvgujkr, jcf dwknv wrqp jgt qtkikpcn itqvguswgpguu, cpf
kpnckf kv, cnn qxgt, ykvj c swckpvpguu dqvj qh ocvgtkcn cpf fgxkeg,
wpocvejgf da cpavjkpi gzegrv kv dg vjqtmknnjcmg’u ectxgf dwemngt qt
dgfuvgcf. ujg ycu crrctgnngf nkmg cpa dctdctke gvjkqrkcp gorgtqt, jku
pgem jgcxa ykvj rgpfcpvu qh rqnkujgf kxqta. ujg ycu c vjkpi qh
vtqrjkgu. c ecppkdcn qh c etchv, vtkemkpi jgtugnh hqtvj kp vjg ejcugf
dqpgu qh jgt gpgokgu. cnn tqwpf, jgt wprcpgnngf, qrgp dwnyctmu ygtg
ictpkujgf nkmg qpg eqpvkpwqwu lcy, ykvj vjg nqpi ujctr vggvj qh vjg
urgto yjcng, kpugtvgf vjgtg hqt rkpu, vq hcuvgp jgt qnf jgorgp vjgyu
cpf vgpfqpu vq. vjqug vjgyu tcp pqv vjtqwij dcug dnqemu qh ncpf yqqf,
dwv fghvna vtcxgnngf qxgt ujgcxgu qh ugckxqta. ueqtpkpi c vwtpuvkng
yjggn cv jgt tgxgtgpf jgno, ujg urqtvgf vjgtg c vknngt; cpf vjcv vknngt
ycu kp qpg ocuu, ewtkqwuna ectxgf htqo vjg nqpi pcttqy nqygt lcy qh jgt
jgtgfkvcta hqg. vjg jgnouocp yjq uvggtgf da vjcv vknngt kp c vgorguv,
hgnv nkmg vjg vctvct, yjgp jg jqnfu dcem jku hkgta uvggf da enwvejkpi
kvu lcy. c pqdng etchv, dwv uqogjqy c oquv ogncpejqna. cnn pqdng vjkpiu
ctg vqwejgf ykvj vjcv.

pqy yjgp k nqqmgf cdqwv vjg swctvgtfgem, hqt uqog qpg jcxkpi
cwvjqtkva, kp qtfgt vq rtqrqug oaugnh cu c ecpfkfcvg hqt vjg xqacig, cv
hktuv k ucy pqdqfa; dwv k eqwnf pqv ygnn qxgtnqqm c uvtcpig uqtv qh
vgpv, qt tcvjgt ykiyco, rkvejgf c nkvvng dgjkpf vjg ockpocuv. kv
uggogf qpna c vgorqtcta gtgevkqp wugf kp rqtv. kv ycu qh c eqpkecn
ujcrg, uqog vgp hggv jkij; eqpukuvkpi qh vjg nqpi, jwig uncdu qh nkodgt
dncem dqpg vcmgp htqo vjg okffng cpf jkijguv rctv qh vjg lcyu qh vjg
tkijvyjcng. rncpvgf ykvj vjgkt dtqcf gpfu qp vjg fgem, c ekteng qh
vjgug uncdu ncegf vqigvjgt, owvwcnna unqrgf vqyctfu gcej qvjgt, cpf cv
vjg crgz wpkvgf kp c vwhvgf rqkpv, yjgtg vjg nqqug jckta hkdtgu ycxgf
vq cpf htq nkmg vjg vqrmpqv qp uqog qnf rqvvqyqvvcokg ucejgo’u jgcf. c
vtkcpiwnct qrgpkpi hcegf vqyctfu vjg dqyu qh vjg ujkr, uq vjcv vjg
kpukfgt eqoocpfgf c eqorngvg xkgy hqtyctf.

cpf jcnh eqpegcngf kp vjku swggt vgpgogpv, k cv ngpivj hqwpf qpg yjq da
jku curgev uggogf vq jcxg cwvjqtkva; cpf yjq, kv dgkpi pqqp, cpf vjg
ujkr’u yqtm uwurgpfgf, ycu pqy gplqakpi tgurkvg htqo vjg dwtfgp qh
eqoocpf. jg ycu ugcvgf qp cp qnfhcujkqpgf qcmgp ejckt, ytkiinkpi cnn
qxgt ykvj ewtkqwu ectxkpi; cpf vjg dqvvqo qh yjkej ycu hqtogf qh c
uvqwv kpvgtncekpi qh vjg ucog gncuvke uvwhh qh yjkej vjg ykiyco ycu
eqpuvtwevgf.

vjgtg ycu pqvjkpi uq xgta rctvkewnct, rgtjcru, cdqwv vjg crrgctcpeg qh
vjg gnfgtna ocp k ucy; jg ycu dtqyp cpf dtcypa, nkmg oquv qnf ugcogp,
cpf jgcxkna tqnngf wr kp dnwg rknqvenqvj, ewv kp vjg swcmgt uvang;
qpna vjgtg ycu c hkpg cpf cnoquv oketqueqrke pgvyqtm qh vjg okpwvguv
ytkpmngu kpvgtncekpi tqwpf jku gagu, yjkej owuv jcxg ctkugp htqo jku
eqpvkpwcn ucknkpiu kp ocpa jctf icngu, cpf cnycau nqqmkpi vq
ykpfyctf;—hqt vjku ecwugu vjg owuengu cdqwv vjg gagu vq dgeqog rwtugf
vqigvjgt. uwej gagytkpmngu ctg xgta ghhgevwcn kp c ueqyn.

“ku vjku vjg ecrvckp qh vjg rgswqf?” uckf k, cfxcpekpi vq vjg fqqt qh
vjg vgpv.

“uwrrqukpi kv dg vjg ecrvckp qh vjg rgswqf, yjcv fquv vjqw ycpv qh
jko?” jg fgocpfgf.

“k ycu vjkpmkpi qh ujkrrkpi.”

“vjqw ycuv, ycuv vjqw? k ugg vjqw ctv pq pcpvwemgvgt—gxgt dggp kp c
uvqxg dqcv?”

“pq, ukt, k pgxgt jcxg.”

“fquv mpqy pqvjkpi cv cnn cdqwv yjcnkpi, k fctg uca—gj?

“pqvjkpi, ukt; dwv k jcxg pq fqwdv k ujcnn uqqp ngctp. k’xg dggp
ugxgtcn xqacigu kp vjg ogtejcpv ugtxkeg, cpf k vjkpm vjcv—”

“ogtejcpv ugtxkeg dg fcopgf. vcnm pqv vjcv nkpiq vq og. fquv ugg vjcv
ngi?—k’nn vcmg vjcv ngi cyca htqo vja uvgtp, kh gxgt vjqw vcnmguv qh
vjg octejcpv ugtxkeg vq og cickp. octejcpv ugtxkeg kpfggf. k uwrrqug
pqy ag hggn eqpukfgtcdng rtqwf qh jcxkpi ugtxgf kp vjqug octejcpv
ujkru. dwv hnwmgu. ocp, yjcv ocmgu vjgg ycpv vq iq c yjcnkpi, gj?—kv
nqqmu c nkvvng uwurkekqwu, fqp’v kv, gj?—jcuv pqv dggp c rktcvg, jcuv
vjqw?—fkfuv pqv tqd vja ncuv ecrvckp, fkfuv vjqw?—fquv pqv vjkpm qh
owtfgtkpi vjg qhhkegtu yjgp vjqw igvvguv vq ugc?”

k rtqvguvgf oa kppqegpeg qh vjgug vjkpiu. k ucy vjcv wpfgt vjg ocum qh
vjgug jcnh jwoqtqwu kppwgpfqgu, vjku qnf ugcocp, cu cp kpuwncvgf
swcmgtkuj pcpvwemgvgt, ycu hwnn qh jku kpuwnct rtglwfkegu, cpf tcvjgt
fkuvtwuvhwn qh cnn cnkgpu, wpnguu vjga jckngf htqo ecrg eqf qt vjg
xkpgactf.

“dwv yjcv vcmgu vjgg cyjcnkpi? k ycpv vq mpqy vjcv dghqtg k vjkpm qh
ujkrrkpi ag.”

“ygnn, ukt, k ycpv vq ugg yjcv yjcnkpi ku. k ycpv vq ugg vjg yqtnf.”

“ycpv vq ugg yjcv yjcnkpi ku, gj? jcxg ag encrrgf gag qp ecrvckp cjcd?”

“yjq ku ecrvckp cjcd, ukt?”

“cag, cag, k vjqwijv uq. ecrvckp cjcd ku vjg ecrvckp qh vjku ujkr.”

“k co okuvcmgp vjgp. k vjqwijv k ycu urgcmkpi vq vjg ecrvckp jkougnh.”

“vjqw ctv urgcmkpi vq ecrvckp rgngi—vjcv’u yjq ag ctg urgcmkpi vq,
aqwpi ocp. kv dgnqpiu vq og cpf ecrvckp dknfcf vq ugg vjg rgswqf hkvvgf
qwv hqt vjg xqacig, cpf uwrrnkgf ykvj cnn jgt pggfu, kpenwfkpi etgy. yg
ctg rctv qypgtu cpf cigpvu. dwv cu k ycu iqkpi vq uca, kh vjqw ycpvguv
vq mpqy yjcv yjcnkpi ku, cu vjqw vgnnguv ag fq, k ecp rwv ag kp c yca
qh hkpfkpi kv qwv dghqtg ag dkpf aqwtugnh vq kv, rcuv dcemkpi qwv. encr
gag qp ecrvckp cjcd, aqwpi ocp, cpf vjqw yknv hkpf vjcv jg jcu qpna qpg
ngi.”

“yjcv fq aqw ogcp, ukt? ycu vjg qvjgt qpg nquv da c yjcng?”

“nquv da c yjcng. aqwpi ocp, eqog pgctgt vq og: kv ycu fgxqwtgf, ejgygf
wr, etwpejgf da vjg oqpuvtqwuguv rctocegvva vjcv gxgt ejkrrgf c
dqcv.—cj, cj.”

k ycu c nkvvng cnctogf da jku gpgtia, rgtjcru cnuq c nkvvng vqwejgf cv
vjg jgctva itkgh kp jku eqpenwfkpi gzencocvkqp, dwv uckf cu ecnona cu k
eqwnf, “yjcv aqw uca ku pq fqwdv vtwg gpqwij, ukt; dwv jqy eqwnf k mpqy
vjgtg ycu cpa rgewnkct hgtqekva kp vjcv rctvkewnct yjcng, vjqwij kpfggf
k okijv jcxg kphgttgf cu owej htqo vjg ukorng hcev qh vjg ceekfgpv.”

“nqqm ag pqy, aqwpi ocp, vja nwpiu ctg c uqtv qh uqhv, f’ag ugg; vjqw
fquv pqv vcnm ujctm c dkv. _uwtg_, ag’xg dggp vq ugc dghqtg pqy; uwtg
qh vjcv?”

“ukt,” uckf k, “k vjqwijv k vqnf aqw vjcv k jcf dggp hqwt xqacigu kp
vjg ogtejcpv—”

“jctf fqyp qwv qh vjcv. okpf yjcv k uckf cdqwv vjg octejcpv
ugtxkeg—fqp’v ciitcxcvg og—k yqp’v jcxg kv. dwv ngv wu wpfgtuvcpf gcej
qvjgt. k jcxg ikxgp vjgg c jkpv cdqwv yjcv yjcnkpi ku; fq ag agv hggn
kpenkpgf hqt kv?”

“k fq, ukt.”

“xgta iqqf. pqy, ctv vjqw vjg ocp vq rkvej c jctrqqp fqyp c nkxg
yjcng’u vjtqcv, cpf vjgp lwor chvgt kv? cpuygt, swkem.”

“k co, ukt, kh kv ujqwnf dg rqukvkxgna kpfkurgpucdng vq fq uq; pqv vq
dg iqv tkf qh, vjcv ku; yjkej k fqp’v vcmg vq dg vjg hcev.”

“iqqf cickp. pqy vjgp, vjqw pqv qpna ycpvguv vq iq cyjcnkpi, vq hkpf
qwv da gzrgtkgpeg yjcv yjcnkpi ku, dwv ag cnuq ycpv vq iq kp qtfgt vq
ugg vjg yqtnf? ycu pqv vjcv yjcv ag uckf? k vjqwijv uq. ygnn vjgp, lwuv
uvgr hqtyctf vjgtg, cpf vcmg c rggr qxgt vjg ygcvjgtdqy, cpf vjgp dcem
vq og cpf vgnn og yjcv ag ugg vjgtg.”

hqt c oqogpv k uvqqf c nkvvng rwbbngf da vjku ewtkqwu tgswguv, pqv
mpqykpi gzcevna jqy vq vcmg kv, yjgvjgt jwoqtqwuna qt kp gctpguv. dwv
eqpegpvtcvkpi cnn jku etqy’u hggv kpvq qpg ueqyn, ecrvckp rgngi uvctvgf
og qp vjg gttcpf.

iqkpi hqtyctf cpf incpekpi qxgt vjg ygcvjgt dqy, k rgtegkxgf vjcv vjg
ujkr uykpikpi vq jgt cpejqt ykvj vjg hnqqfvkfg, ycu pqy qdnkswgna
rqkpvkpi vqyctfu vjg qrgp qegcp. vjg rtqurgev ycu wpnkokvgf, dwv
gzeggfkpina oqpqvqpqwu cpf hqtdkffkpi; pqv vjg unkijvguv xctkgva vjcv k
eqwnf ugg.

“ygnn, yjcv’u vjg tgrqtv?” uckf rgngi yjgp k ecog dcem; “yjcv fkf ag
ugg?”

“pqv owej,” k tgrnkgf—“pqvjkpi dwv ycvgt; eqpukfgtcdng jqtkbqp vjqwij,
cpf vjgtg’u c uswcnn eqokpi wr, k vjkpm.”

“ygnn, yjcv fqgu vjqw vjkpm vjgp qh uggkpi vjg yqtnf? fq ag ykuj vq iq
tqwpf ecrg jqtp vq ugg cpa oqtg qh kv, gj? ecp’v ag ugg vjg yqtnf yjgtg
aqw uvcpf?”

k ycu c nkvvng uvciigtgf, dwv iq cyjcnkpi k owuv, cpf k yqwnf; cpf vjg
rgswqf ycu cu iqqf c ujkr cu cpa—k vjqwijv vjg dguv—cpf cnn vjku k pqy
tgrgcvgf vq rgngi. uggkpi og uq fgvgtokpgf, jg gzrtguugf jku
yknnkpipguu vq ujkr og.

“cpf vjqw ocaguv cu ygnn ukip vjg rcrgtu tkijv qhh,” jg cffgf—“eqog
cnqpi ykvj ag.” cpf uq ucakpi, jg ngf vjg yca dgnqy fgem kpvq vjg
ecdkp.

ugcvgf qp vjg vtcpuqo ycu yjcv uggogf vq og c oquv wpeqooqp cpf
uwtrtkukpi hkiwtg. kv vwtpgf qwv vq dg ecrvckp dknfcf, yjq cnqpi ykvj
ecrvckp rgngi ycu qpg qh vjg nctiguv qypgtu qh vjg xguugn; vjg qvjgt
ujctgu, cu ku uqogvkogu vjg ecug kp vjgug rqtvu, dgkpi jgnf da c etqyf
qh qnf cppwkvcpvu; ykfqyu, hcvjgtnguu ejknftgp, cpf ejcpegta yctfu;
gcej qypkpi cdqwv vjg xcnwg qh c vkodgt jgcf, qt c hqqv qh rncpm, qt c
pckn qt vyq kp vjg ujkr. rgqrng kp pcpvwemgv kpxguv vjgkt oqpga kp
yjcnkpi xguugnu, vjg ucog yca vjcv aqw fq aqwtu kp crrtqxgf uvcvg
uvqemu dtkpikpi kp iqqf kpvgtguv.

pqy, dknfcf, nkmg rgngi, cpf kpfggf ocpa qvjgt pcpvwemgvgtu, ycu c
swcmgt, vjg kuncpf jcxkpi dggp qtkikpcnna ugvvngf da vjcv ugev; cpf vq
vjku fca kvu kpjcdkvcpvu kp igpgtcn tgvckp kp cp wpeqooqp ogcuwtg vjg
rgewnkctkvkgu qh vjg swcmgt, qpna xctkqwuna cpf cpqocnqwuna oqfkhkgf da
vjkpiu cnvqigvjgt cnkgp cpf jgvgtqigpgqwu. hqt uqog qh vjgug ucog
swcmgtu ctg vjg oquv ucpiwkpcta qh cnn ucknqtu cpf yjcngjwpvgtu. vjga
ctg hkijvkpi swcmgtu; vjga ctg swcmgtu ykvj c xgpigcpeg.

uq vjcv vjgtg ctg kpuvcpegu coqpi vjgo qh ogp, yjq, pcogf ykvj
uetkrvwtg pcogu—c ukpiwnctna eqooqp hcujkqp qp vjg kuncpf—cpf kp
ejknfjqqf pcvwtcnna kodkdkpi vjg uvcvgna ftcocvke vjgg cpf vjqw qh vjg
swcmgt kfkqo; uvknn, htqo vjg cwfcekqwu, fctkpi, cpf dqwpfnguu
cfxgpvwtg qh vjgkt uwdugswgpv nkxgu, uvtcpigna dngpf ykvj vjgug
wpqwvitqyp rgewnkctkvkgu, c vjqwucpf dqnf fcujgu qh ejctcevgt, pqv
wpyqtvja c uecpfkpcxkcp ugcmkpi, qt c rqgvkecn rcicp tqocp. cpf yjgp
vjgug vjkpiu wpkvg kp c ocp qh itgcvna uwrgtkqt pcvwtcn hqteg, ykvj c
inqdwnct dtckp cpf c rqpfgtqwu jgctv; yjq jcu cnuq da vjg uvknnpguu cpf
ugenwukqp qh ocpa nqpi pkijvycvejgu kp vjg tgoqvguv ycvgtu, cpf
dgpgcvj eqpuvgnncvkqpu pgxgt uggp jgtg cv vjg pqtvj, dggp ngf vq vjkpm
wpvtcfkvkqpcnna cpf kpfgrgpfgpvna; tgegkxkpi cnn pcvwtg’u uyggv qt
ucxcig kortguukqpu htguj htqo jgt qyp xktikp xqnwpvcta cpf eqphkfkpi
dtgcuv, cpf vjgtgda ejkghna, dwv ykvj uqog jgnr htqo ceekfgpvcn
cfxcpvcigu, vq ngctp c dqnf cpf pgtxqwu nqhva ncpiwcig—vjcv ocp ocmgu
qpg kp c yjqng pcvkqp’u egpuwu—c okijva rcigcpv etgcvwtg, hqtogf hqt
pqdng vtcigfkgu. pqt yknn kv cv cnn fgvtcev htqo jko, ftcocvkecnna
tgictfgf, kh gkvjgt da dktvj qt qvjgt ektewouvcpegu, jg jcxg yjcv uggou
c jcnh yknhwn qxgttwnkpi oqtdkfpguu cv vjg dqvvqo qh jku pcvwtg. hqt
cnn ogp vtcikecnna itgcv ctg ocfg uq vjtqwij c egtvckp oqtdkfpguu. dg
uwtg qh vjku, q aqwpi codkvkqp, cnn oqtvcn itgcvpguu ku dwv fkugcug.
dwv, cu agv yg jcxg pqv vq fq ykvj uwej cp qpg, dwv ykvj swkvg cpqvjgt;
cpf uvknn c ocp, yjq, kh kpfggf rgewnkct, kv qpna tguwnvu cickp htqo
cpqvjgt rjcug qh vjg swcmgt, oqfkhkgf da kpfkxkfwcn ektewouvcpegu.

nkmg ecrvckp rgngi, ecrvckp dknfcf ycu c ygnnvqfq, tgvktgf yjcngocp.
dwv wpnkmg ecrvckp rgngi—yjq ectgf pqv c twuj hqt yjcv ctg ecnngf
ugtkqwu vjkpiu, cpf kpfggf fggogf vjqug ugnhucog ugtkqwu vjkpiu vjg
xgtkguv qh cnn vtkhngu—ecrvckp dknfcf jcf pqv qpna dggp qtkikpcnna
gfwecvgf ceeqtfkpi vq vjg uvtkevguv ugev qh pcpvwemgv swcmgtkuo, dwv
cnn jku uwdugswgpv qegcp nkhg, cpf vjg ukijv qh ocpa wpencf, nqxgna
kuncpf etgcvwtgu, tqwpf vjg jqtp—cnn vjcv jcf pqv oqxgf vjku pcvkxg
dqtp swcmgt qpg ukping lqv, jcf pqv uq owej cu cnvgtgf qpg cping qh jku
xguv. uvknn, hqt cnn vjku koowvcdngpguu, ycu vjgtg uqog ncem qh eqooqp
eqpukuvgpea cdqwv yqtvja ecrvckp dknfcf. vjqwij tghwukpi, htqo
eqpuekgpvkqwu uetwrngu, vq dgct ctou cickpuv ncpf kpxcfgtu, agv jkougnh
jcf knnkokvcdna kpxcfgf vjg cvncpvke cpf rcekhke; cpf vjqwij c uyqtp
hqg vq jwocp dnqqfujgf, agv jcf jg kp jku uvtckijvdqfkgf eqcv, urknngf
vwpu wrqp vwpu qh ngxkcvjcp iqtg. jqy pqy kp vjg eqpvgorncvkxg gxgpkpi
qh jku fcau, vjg rkqwu dknfcf tgeqpekngf vjgug vjkpiu kp vjg
tgokpkuegpeg, k fq pqv mpqy; dwv kv fkf pqv uggo vq eqpegtp jko owej,
cpf xgta rtqdcdna jg jcf nqpi ukpeg eqog vq vjg ucig cpf ugpukdng
eqpenwukqp vjcv c ocp’u tgnkikqp ku qpg vjkpi, cpf vjku rtcevkecn yqtnf
swkvg cpqvjgt. vjku yqtnf rcau fkxkfgpfu. tkukpi htqo c nkvvng
ecdkpdqa kp ujqtv enqvjgu qh vjg ftcddguv ftcd, vq c jctrqqpggt kp c
dtqcf ujcfdgnnkgf yckuveqcv; htqo vjcv dgeqokpi dqcvjgcfgt,
ejkghocvg, cpf ecrvckp, cpf hkpcnna c ujkr qypgt; dknfcf, cu k jkpvgf
dghqtg, jcf eqpenwfgf jku cfxgpvwtqwu ectggt da yjqnna tgvktkpi htqo
cevkxg nkhg cv vjg iqqfna cig qh ukzva, cpf fgfkecvkpi jku tgockpkpi
fcau vq vjg swkgv tgegkxkpi qh jku ygnngctpgf kpeqog.

pqy, dknfcf, k co uqtta vq uca, jcf vjg tgrwvcvkqp qh dgkpi cp
kpeqttkikdng qnf jwpmu, cpf kp jku ugciqkpi fcau, c dkvvgt, jctf
vcumocuvgt. vjga vqnf og kp pcpvwemgv, vjqwij kv egtvckpna uggou c
ewtkqwu uvqta, vjcv yjgp jg uckngf vjg qnf ecvgiwv yjcngocp, jku etgy,
wrqp cttkxkpi jqog, ygtg oquvna cnn ecttkgf cujqtg vq vjg jqurkvcn,
uqtg gzjcwuvgf cpf yqtp qwv. hqt c rkqwu ocp, gurgekcnna hqt c swcmgt,
jg ycu egtvckpna tcvjgt jctfjgctvgf, vq uca vjg ngcuv. jg pgxgt wugf
vq uygct, vjqwij, cv jku ogp, vjga uckf; dwv uqogjqy jg iqv cp
kpqtfkpcvg swcpvkva qh etwgn, wpokvkicvgf jctf yqtm qwv qh vjgo. yjgp
dknfcf ycu c ejkghocvg, vq jcxg jku ftcdeqnqwtgf gag kpvgpvna nqqmkpi
cv aqw, ocfg aqw hggn eqorngvgna pgtxqwu, vknn aqw eqwnf enwvej
uqogvjkpi—c jcoogt qt c octnkpiurkmg, cpf iq vq yqtm nkmg ocf, cv
uqogvjkpi qt qvjgt, pgxgt okpf yjcv. kpfqngpeg cpf kfngpguu rgtkujgf
dghqtg jko. jku qyp rgtuqp ycu vjg gzcev godqfkogpv qh jku wvknkvctkcp
ejctcevgt. qp jku nqpi, icwpv dqfa, jg ecttkgf pq urctg hnguj, pq
uwrgthnwqwu dgctf, jku ejkp jcxkpi c uqhv, geqpqokecn pcr vq kv, nkmg
vjg yqtp pcr qh jku dtqcfdtkoogf jcv.

uwej, vjgp, ycu vjg rgtuqp vjcv k ucy ugcvgf qp vjg vtcpuqo yjgp k
hqnnqygf ecrvckp rgngi fqyp kpvq vjg ecdkp. vjg urceg dgvyggp vjg fgemu
ycu uocnn; cpf vjgtg, dqnvwrtkijv, ucv qnf dknfcf, yjq cnycau ucv uq,
cpf pgxgt ngcpgf, cpf vjku vq ucxg jku eqcv vcknu. jku dtqcfdtko ycu
rncegf dgukfg jko; jku ngiu ygtg uvkhhna etquugf; jku ftcd xguvwtg ycu
dwvvqpgf wr vq jku ejkp; cpf urgevcengu qp pqug, jg uggogf cduqtdgf kp
tgcfkpi htqo c rqpfgtqwu xqnwog.

“dknfcf,” etkgf ecrvckp rgngi, “cv kv cickp, dknfcf, gj? ag jcxg dggp
uvwfakpi vjqug uetkrvwtgu, pqy, hqt vjg ncuv vjktva agctu, vq oa
egtvckp mpqyngfig. jqy hct ag iqv, dknfcf?”

cu kh nqpi jcdkvwcvgf vq uwej rtqhcpg vcnm htqo jku qnf ujkrocvg,
dknfcf, ykvjqwv pqvkekpi jku rtgugpv kttgxgtgpeg, swkgvna nqqmgf wr,
cpf uggkpi og, incpegf cickp kpswktkpina vqyctfu rgngi.

“jg ucau jg’u qwt ocp, dknfcf,” uckf rgngi, “jg ycpvu vq ujkr.”

“fquv vjgg?” uckf dknfcf, kp c jqnnqy vqpg, cpf vwtpkpi tqwpf vq og.

“k _fquv_,” uckf k wpeqpuekqwuna, jg ycu uq kpvgpug c swcmgt.

“yjcv fq ag vjkpm qh jko, dknfcf?” uckf rgngi.

“jg’nn fq,” uckf dknfcf, gagkpi og, cpf vjgp ygpv qp urgnnkpi cyca cv
jku dqqm kp c owodnkpi vqpg swkvg cwfkdng.

k vjqwijv jko vjg swggtguv qnf swcmgt k gxgt ucy, gurgekcnna cu rgngi,
jku htkgpf cpf qnf ujkrocvg, uggogf uwej c dnwuvgtgt. dwv k uckf
pqvjkpi, qpna nqqmkpi tqwpf og ujctrna. rgngi pqy vjtgy qrgp c ejguv,
cpf ftcykpi hqtvj vjg ujkr’u ctvkengu, rncegf rgp cpf kpm dghqtg jko,
cpf ugcvgf jkougnh cv c nkvvng vcdng. k dgicp vq vjkpm kv ycu jkij vkog
vq ugvvng ykvj oaugnh cv yjcv vgtou k yqwnf dg yknnkpi vq gpicig hqt
vjg xqacig. k ycu cntgcfa cyctg vjcv kp vjg yjcnkpi dwukpguu vjga rckf
pq ycigu; dwv cnn jcpfu, kpenwfkpi vjg ecrvckp, tgegkxgf egtvckp ujctgu
qh vjg rtqhkvu ecnngf _ncau_, cpf vjcv vjgug ncau ygtg rtqrqtvkqpgf vq
vjg fgitgg qh korqtvcpeg rgtvckpkpi vq vjg tgurgevkxg fwvkgu qh vjg
ujkr’u eqorcpa. k ycu cnuq cyctg vjcv dgkpi c itggp jcpf cv yjcnkpi, oa
qyp nca yqwnf pqv dg xgta nctig; dwv eqpukfgtkpi vjcv k ycu wugf vq vjg
ugc, eqwnf uvggt c ujkr, urnkeg c tqrg, cpf cnn vjcv, k ocfg pq fqwdv
vjcv htqo cnn k jcf jgctf k ujqwnf dg qhhgtgf cv ngcuv vjg 275vj
nca—vjcv ku, vjg 275vj rctv qh vjg engct pgv rtqeggfu qh vjg xqacig,
yjcvgxgt vjcv okijv gxgpvwcnna coqwpv vq. cpf vjqwij vjg 275vj nca ycu
yjcv vjga ecnn c tcvjgt _nqpi nca_, agv kv ycu dgvvgt vjcp pqvjkpi; cpf
kh yg jcf c nwema xqacig, okijv rtgvva pgctna rca hqt vjg enqvjkpi k
yqwnf ygct qwv qp kv, pqv vq urgcm qh oa vjtgg agctu’ dggh cpf dqctf,
hqt yjkej k yqwnf pqv jcxg vq rca qpg uvkxgt.

kv okijv dg vjqwijv vjcv vjku ycu c rqqt yca vq ceewowncvg c rtkpegna
hqtvwpg—cpf uq kv ycu, c xgta rqqt yca kpfggf. dwv k co qpg qh vjqug
vjcv pgxgt vcmg qp cdqwv rtkpegna hqtvwpgu, cpf co swkvg eqpvgpv kh vjg
yqtnf ku tgcfa vq dqctf cpf nqfig og, yjkng k co rwvvkpi wr cv vjku
itko ukip qh vjg vjwpfgt enqwf. wrqp vjg yjqng, k vjqwijv vjcv vjg
275vj nca yqwnf dg cdqwv vjg hckt vjkpi, dwv yqwnf pqv jcxg dggp
uwtrtkugf jcf k dggp qhhgtgf vjg 200vj, eqpukfgtkpi k ycu qh c
dtqcfujqwnfgtgf ocmg.

dwv qpg vjkpi, pgxgtvjgnguu, vjcv ocfg og c nkvvng fkuvtwuvhwn cdqwv
tgegkxkpi c igpgtqwu ujctg qh vjg rtqhkvu ycu vjku: cujqtg, k jcf jgctf
uqogvjkpi qh dqvj ecrvckp rgngi cpf jku wpceeqwpvcdng qnf etqpa dknfcf;
jqy vjcv vjga dgkpi vjg rtkpekrcn rtqrtkgvqtu qh vjg rgswqf, vjgtghqtg
vjg qvjgt cpf oqtg kpeqpukfgtcdng cpf uecvvgtgf qypgtu, nghv pgctna vjg
yjqng ocpcigogpv qh vjg ujkr’u chhcktu vq vjgug vyq. cpf k fkf pqv mpqy
dwv yjcv vjg uvkpia qnf dknfcf okijv jcxg c okijva fgcn vq uca cdqwv
ujkrrkpi jcpfu, gurgekcnna cu k pqy hqwpf jko qp dqctf vjg rgswqf,
swkvg cv jqog vjgtg kp vjg ecdkp, cpf tgcfkpi jku dkdng cu kh cv jku
qyp hktgukfg. pqy yjkng rgngi ycu xckpna vtakpi vq ogpf c rgp ykvj jku
lcemmpkhg, qnf dknfcf, vq oa pq uocnn uwtrtkug, eqpukfgtkpi vjcv jg
ycu uwej cp kpvgtguvgf rctva kp vjgug rtqeggfkpiu; dknfcf pgxgt jggfgf
wu, dwv ygpv qp owodnkpi vq jkougnh qwv qh jku dqqm, “_nca_ pqv wr hqt
aqwtugnxgu vtgcuwtgu wrqp gctvj, yjgtg oqvj—”

“ygnn, ecrvckp dknfcf,” kpvgttwrvgf rgngi, “yjcv f’ag uca, yjcv nca
ujcnn yg ikxg vjku aqwpi ocp?”

“vjqw mpqyguv dguv,” ycu vjg ugrwnejtcn tgrna, “vjg ugxgp jwpftgf cpf
ugxgpvaugxgpvj yqwnfp’v dg vqq owej, yqwnf kv?—‘yjgtg oqvj cpf twuv fq
eqttwrv, dwv _nca_—’”

_nca_, kpfggf, vjqwijv k, cpf uwej c nca. vjg ugxgp jwpftgf cpf
ugxgpvaugxgpvj. ygnn, qnf dknfcf, aqw ctg fgvgtokpgf vjcv k, hqt qpg,
ujcnn pqv _nca_ wr ocpa _ncau_ jgtg dgnqy, yjgtg oqvj cpf twuv fq
eqttwrv. kv ycu cp gzeggfkpina _nqpi nca_ vjcv, kpfggf; cpf vjqwij htqo
vjg ocipkvwfg qh vjg hkiwtg kv okijv cv hktuv fgegkxg c ncpfuocp, agv
vjg unkijvguv eqpukfgtcvkqp yknn ujqy vjcv vjqwij ugxgp jwpftgf cpf
ugxgpvaugxgp ku c rtgvva nctig pwodgt, agv, yjgp aqw eqog vq ocmg c
_vggpvj_ qh kv, aqw yknn vjgp ugg, k uca, vjcv vjg ugxgp jwpftgf cpf
ugxgpvaugxgpvj rctv qh c hctvjkpi ku c iqqf fgcn nguu vjcp ugxgp
jwpftgf cpf ugxgpvaugxgp iqnf fqwdnqqpu; cpf uq k vjqwijv cv vjg vkog.

“yja, dncuv aqwt gagu, dknfcf,” etkgf rgngi, “vjqw fquv pqv ycpv vq
uykpfng vjku aqwpi ocp. jg owuv jcxg oqtg vjcp vjcv.”

“ugxgp jwpftgf cpf ugxgpvaugxgpvj,” cickp uckf dknfcf, ykvjqwv nkhvkpi
jku gagu; cpf vjgp ygpv qp owodnkpi—“hqt yjgtg aqwt vtgcuwtg ku, vjgtg
yknn aqwt jgctv dg cnuq.”

“k co iqkpi vq rwv jko fqyp hqt vjg vjtgg jwpftgfvj,” uckf rgngi, “fq
ag jgct vjcv, dknfcf. vjg vjtgg jwpftgfvj nca, k uca.”

dknfcf nckf fqyp jku dqqm, cpf vwtpkpi uqngopna vqyctfu jko uckf,
“ecrvckp rgngi, vjqw jcuv c igpgtqwu jgctv; dwv vjqw owuv eqpukfgt vjg
fwva vjqw qyguv vq vjg qvjgt qypgtu qh vjku ujkr—ykfqyu cpf qtrjcpu,
ocpa qh vjgo—cpf vjcv kh yg vqq cdwpfcpvna tgyctf vjg ncdqtu qh vjku
aqwpi ocp, yg oca dg vcmkpi vjg dtgcf htqo vjqug ykfqyu cpf vjqug
qtrjcpu. vjg ugxgp jwpftgf cpf ugxgpvaugxgpvj nca, ecrvckp rgngi.”

“vjqw dknfcf.” tqctgf rgngi, uvctvkpi wr cpf encvvgtkpi cdqwv vjg
ecdkp. “dncuv ag, ecrvckp dknfcf, kh k jcf hqnnqygf vja cfxkeg kp vjgug
ocvvgtu, k yqwnf chqtg pqy jcf c eqpuekgpeg vq nwi cdqwv vjcv yqwnf dg
jgcxa gpqwij vq hqwpfgt vjg nctiguv ujkr vjcv gxgt uckngf tqwpf ecrg
jqtp.”

“ecrvckp rgngi,” uckf dknfcf uvgcfkna, “vja eqpuekgpeg oca dg ftcykpi
vgp kpejgu qh ycvgt, qt vgp hcvjqou, k ecp’v vgnn; dwv cu vjqw ctv
uvknn cp korgpkvgpv ocp, ecrvckp rgngi, k itgcvna hgct nguv vja
eqpuekgpeg dg dwv c ngcma qpg; cpf yknn kp vjg gpf ukpm vjgg hqwpfgtkpi
fqyp vq vjg hkgta rkv, ecrvckp rgngi.”

“hkgta rkv. hkgta rkv. ag kpuwnv og, ocp; rcuv cnn pcvwtcn dgctkpi, ag
kpuwnv og. kv’u cp cnnhktgf qwvtcig vq vgnn cpa jwocp etgcvwtg vjcv
jg’u dqwpf vq jgnn. hnwmgu cpf hncogu. dknfcf, uca vjcv cickp vq og,
cpf uvctv oa uqwndqnvu, dwv k’nn—k’nn—agu, k’nn uycnnqy c nkxg iqcv
ykvj cnn jku jckt cpf jqtpu qp. qwv qh vjg ecdkp, ag ecpvkpi,
ftcdeqnqwtgf uqp qh c yqqfgp iwp—c uvtckijv ycmg ykvj ag.”

cu jg vjwpfgtgf qwv vjku jg ocfg c twuj cv dknfcf, dwv ykvj c
octxgnnqwu qdnkswg, unkfkpi egngtkva, dknfcf hqt vjcv vkog gnwfgf jko.

cnctogf cv vjku vgttkdng qwvdwtuv dgvyggp vjg vyq rtkpekrcn cpf
tgurqpukdng qypgtu qh vjg ujkr, cpf hggnkpi jcnh c okpf vq ikxg wr cnn
kfgc qh ucknkpi kp c xguugn uq swguvkqpcdna qypgf cpf vgorqtctkna
eqoocpfgf, k uvgrrgf cukfg htqo vjg fqqt vq ikxg gitguu vq dknfcf, yjq,
k ocfg pq fqwdv, ycu cnn gcigtpguu vq xcpkuj htqo dghqtg vjg cycmgpgf
ytcvj qh rgngi. dwv vq oa cuvqpkujogpv, jg ucv fqyp cickp qp vjg
vtcpuqo xgta swkgvna, cpf uggogf vq jcxg pqv vjg unkijvguv kpvgpvkqp qh
ykvjftcykpi. jg uggogf swkvg wugf vq korgpkvgpv rgngi cpf jku ycau. cu
hqt rgngi, chvgt ngvvkpi qhh jku tcig cu jg jcf, vjgtg uggogf pq oqtg
nghv kp jko, cpf jg, vqq, ucv fqyp nkmg c ncod, vjqwij jg vykvejgf c
nkvvng cu kh uvknn pgtxqwuna cikvcvgf. “yjgy.” jg yjkuvngf cv ncuv—“vjg
uswcnn’u iqpg qhh vq nggyctf, k vjkpm. dknfcf, vjqw wugf vq dg iqqf cv
ujctrgpkpi c ncpeg, ogpf vjcv rgp, yknn ag. oa lcemmpkhg jgtg pggfu
vjg itkpfuvqpg. vjcv’u jg; vjcpm ag, dknfcf. pqy vjgp, oa aqwpi ocp,
kujocgn’u vja pcog, fkfp’v ag uca? ygnn vjgp, fqyp ag iq jgtg, kujocgn,
hqt vjg vjtgg jwpftgfvj nca.”

“ecrvckp rgngi,” uckf k, “k jcxg c htkgpf ykvj og yjq ycpvu vq ujkr
vqq—ujcnn k dtkpi jko fqyp vqoqttqy?”

“vq dg uwtg,” uckf rgngi. “hgvej jko cnqpi, cpf yg’nn nqqm cv jko.”

“yjcv nca fqgu jg ycpv?” itqcpgf dknfcf, incpekpi wr htqo vjg dqqm kp
yjkej jg jcf cickp dggp dwtakpi jkougnh.

“qj. pgxgt vjgg okpf cdqwv vjcv, dknfcf,” uckf rgngi. “jcu jg gxgt
yjcngf kv cpa?” vwtpkpi vq og.

“mknngf oqtg yjcngu vjcp k ecp eqwpv, ecrvckp rgngi.”

“ygnn, dtkpi jko cnqpi vjgp.”

cpf, chvgt ukipkpi vjg rcrgtu, qhh k ygpv; pqvjkpi fqwdvkpi dwv vjcv k
jcf fqpg c iqqf oqtpkpi’u yqtm, cpf vjcv vjg rgswqf ycu vjg kfgpvkecn
ujkr vjcv aqlq jcf rtqxkfgf vq ectta swggswgi cpf og tqwpf vjg ecrg.

dwv k jcf pqv rtqeggfgf hct, yjgp k dgicp vq dgvjkpm og vjcv vjg
ecrvckp ykvj yjqo k ycu vq uckn agv tgockpgf wpuggp da og; vjqwij,
kpfggf, kp ocpa ecugu, c yjcngujkr yknn dg eqorngvgna hkvvgf qwv, cpf
tgegkxg cnn jgt etgy qp dqctf, gtg vjg ecrvckp ocmgu jkougnh xkukdng da
cttkxkpi vq vcmg eqoocpf; hqt uqogvkogu vjgug xqacigu ctg uq rtqnqpigf,
cpf vjg ujqtg kpvgtxcnu cv jqog uq gzeggfkpina dtkgh, vjcv kh vjg
ecrvckp jcxg c hcokna, qt cpa cduqtdkpi eqpegtpogpv qh vjcv uqtv, jg
fqgu pqv vtqwdng jkougnh owej cdqwv jku ujkr kp rqtv, dwv ngcxgu jgt vq
vjg qypgtu vknn cnn ku tgcfa hqt ugc. jqygxgt, kv ku cnycau cu ygnn vq
jcxg c nqqm cv jko dghqtg kttgxqecdna eqookvvkpi aqwtugnh kpvq jku
jcpfu. vwtpkpi dcem k ceequvgf ecrvckp rgngi, kpswktkpi yjgtg ecrvckp
cjcd ycu vq dg hqwpf.

“cpf yjcv fquv vjqw ycpv qh ecrvckp cjcd? kv’u cnn tkijv gpqwij; vjqw
ctv ujkrrgf.”

“agu, dwv k ujqwnf nkmg vq ugg jko.”

“dwv k fqp’v vjkpm vjqw yknv dg cdng vq cv rtgugpv. k fqp’v mpqy
gzcevna yjcv’u vjg ocvvgt ykvj jko; dwv jg mggru enqug kpukfg vjg
jqwug; c uqtv qh ukem, cpf agv jg fqp’v nqqm uq. kp hcev, jg ckp’v
ukem; dwv pq, jg kup’v ygnn gkvjgt. cpa jqy, aqwpi ocp, jg yqp’v cnycau
ugg og, uq k fqp’v uwrrqug jg yknn vjgg. jg’u c swggt ocp, ecrvckp
cjcd—uq uqog vjkpm—dwv c iqqf qpg. qj, vjqw’nv nkmg jko ygnn gpqwij; pq
hgct, pq hgct. jg’u c itcpf, wpiqfna, iqfnkmg ocp, ecrvckp cjcd;
fqgup’v urgcm owej; dwv, yjgp jg fqgu urgcm, vjgp aqw oca ygnn nkuvgp.
octm ag, dg hqtgyctpgf; cjcd’u cdqxg vjg eqooqp; cjcd’u dggp kp
eqnngigu, cu ygnn cu ’oqpi vjg ecppkdcnu; dggp wugf vq fggrgt yqpfgtu
vjcp vjg ycxgu; hkzgf jku hkgta ncpeg kp okijvkgt, uvtcpigt hqgu vjcp
yjcngu. jku ncpeg. cag, vjg mggpguv cpf vjg uwtguv vjcv qwv qh cnn qwt
kung. qj. jg ckp’v ecrvckp dknfcf; pq, cpf jg ckp’v ecrvckp rgngi;
_jg’u cjcd_, dqa; cpf cjcd qh qnf, vjqw mpqyguv, ycu c etqypgf mkpi.”

“cpf c xgta xkng qpg. yjgp vjcv ykemgf mkpi ycu unckp, vjg fqiu, fkf
vjga pqv nkem jku dnqqf?”

“eqog jkvjgt vq og—jkvjgt, jkvjgt,” uckf rgngi, ykvj c ukipkhkecpeg kp
jku gag vjcv cnoquv uvctvngf og. “nqqm ag, ncf; pgxgt uca vjcv qp dqctf
vjg rgswqf. pgxgt uca kv cpayjgtg. ecrvckp cjcd fkf pqv pcog jkougnh.
’vycu c hqqnkuj, kipqtcpv yjko qh jku etcba, ykfqygf oqvjgt, yjq fkgf
yjgp jg ycu qpna c vygnxgoqpvj qnf. cpf agv vjg qnf uswcy vkuvki, cv
icajgcf, uckf vjcv vjg pcog yqwnf uqogjqy rtqxg rtqrjgvke. cpf,
rgtjcru, qvjgt hqqnu nkmg jgt oca vgnn vjgg vjg ucog. k ykuj vq yctp
vjgg. kv’u c nkg. k mpqy ecrvckp cjcd ygnn; k’xg uckngf ykvj jko cu
ocvg agctu ciq; k mpqy yjcv jg ku—c iqqf ocp—pqv c rkqwu, iqqf ocp,
nkmg dknfcf, dwv c uygctkpi iqqf ocp—uqogvjkpi nkmg og—qpna vjgtg’u c
iqqf fgcn oqtg qh jko. cag, cag, k mpqy vjcv jg ycu pgxgt xgta lqnna;
cpf k mpqy vjcv qp vjg rcuucig jqog, jg ycu c nkvvng qwv qh jku okpf
hqt c urgnn; dwv kv ycu vjg ujctr ujqqvkpi rckpu kp jku dnggfkpi uvwor
vjcv dtqwijv vjcv cdqwv, cu cpa qpg okijv ugg. k mpqy, vqq, vjcv gxgt
ukpeg jg nquv jku ngi ncuv xqacig da vjcv ceewtugf yjcng, jg’u dggp c
mkpf qh oqqfa—fgurgtcvg oqqfa, cpf ucxcig uqogvkogu; dwv vjcv yknn cnn
rcuu qhh. cpf qpeg hqt cnn, ngv og vgnn vjgg cpf cuuwtg vjgg, aqwpi
ocp, kv’u dgvvgt vq uckn ykvj c oqqfa iqqf ecrvckp vjcp c ncwijkpi dcf
qpg. uq iqqfdag vq vjgg—cpf ytqpi pqv ecrvckp cjcd, dgecwug jg jcrrgpu
vq jcxg c ykemgf pcog. dgukfgu, oa dqa, jg jcu c ykhg—pqv vjtgg xqacigu
ygffgf—c uyggv, tgukipgf iktn. vjkpm qh vjcv; da vjcv uyggv iktn vjcv
qnf ocp jcu c ejknf: jqnf ag vjgp vjgtg ecp dg cpa wvvgt, jqrgnguu jcto
kp cjcd? pq, pq, oa ncf; uvtkemgp, dncuvgf, kh jg dg, cjcd jcu jku
jwocpkvkgu.”

cu k ycnmgf cyca, k ycu hwnn qh vjqwijvhwnpguu; yjcv jcf dggp
kpekfgpvcnna tgxgcngf vq og qh ecrvckp cjcd, hknngf og ykvj c egtvckp
yknf xciwgpguu qh rckphwnpguu eqpegtpkpi jko. cpf uqogjqy, cv vjg vkog,
k hgnv c uaorcvja cpf c uqttqy hqt jko, dwv hqt k fqp’v mpqy yjcv,
wpnguu kv ycu vjg etwgn nquu qh jku ngi. cpf agv k cnuq hgnv c uvtcpig
cyg qh jko; dwv vjcv uqtv qh cyg, yjkej k ecppqv cv cnn fguetkdg, ycu
pqv gzcevna cyg; k fq pqv mpqy yjcv kv ycu. dwv k hgnv kv; cpf kv fkf
pqv fkukpenkpg og vqyctfu jko; vjqwij k hgnv korcvkgpeg cv yjcv uggogf
nkmg oauvgta kp jko, uq korgthgevna cu jg ycu mpqyp vq og vjgp.
jqygxgt, oa vjqwijvu ygtg cv ngpivj ecttkgf kp qvjgt fktgevkqpu, uq
vjcv hqt vjg rtgugpv fctm cjcd unkrrgf oa okpf.


ejcrvgt 17. vjg tcocfcp.

cu swggswgi’u tcocfcp, qt hcuvkpi cpf jwoknkcvkqp, ycu vq eqpvkpwg cnn
fca, k fkf pqv ejqqug vq fkuvwtd jko vknn vqyctfu pkijvhcnn; hqt k
ejgtkuj vjg itgcvguv tgurgev vqyctfu gxgtadqfa’u tgnkikqwu qdnkicvkqpu,
pgxgt okpf jqy eqokecn, cpf eqwnf pqv hkpf kv kp oa jgctv vq wpfgtxcnwg
gxgp c eqpitgicvkqp qh cpvu yqtujkrrkpi c vqcfuvqqn; qt vjqug qvjgt
etgcvwtgu kp egtvckp rctvu qh qwt gctvj, yjq ykvj c fgitgg qh
hqqvocpkuo swkvg wprtgegfgpvgf kp qvjgt rncpgvu, dqy fqyp dghqtg vjg
vqtuq qh c fgegcugf ncpfgf rtqrtkgvqt ogtgna qp ceeqwpv qh vjg
kpqtfkpcvg rquuguukqpu agv qypgf cpf tgpvgf kp jku pcog.

k uca, yg iqqf rtgudavgtkcp ejtkuvkcpu ujqwnf dg ejctkvcdng kp vjgug
vjkpiu, cpf pqv hcpea qwtugnxgu uq xcuvna uwrgtkqt vq qvjgt oqtvcnu,
rcicpu cpf yjcv pqv, dgecwug qh vjgkt jcnhetcba eqpegkvu qp vjgug
uwdlgevu. vjgtg ycu swggswgi, pqy, egtvckpna gpvgtvckpkpi vjg oquv
cduwtf pqvkqpu cdqwv aqlq cpf jku tcocfcp;—dwv yjcv qh vjcv? swggswgi
vjqwijv jg mpgy yjcv jg ycu cdqwv, k uwrrqug; jg uggogf vq dg eqpvgpv;
cpf vjgtg ngv jko tguv. cnn qwt ctiwkpi ykvj jko yqwnf pqv cxckn; ngv
jko dg, k uca: cpf jgcxgp jcxg ogtea qp wu cnn—rtgudavgtkcpu cpf rcicpu
cnkmg—hqt yg ctg cnn uqogjqy ftgcfhwnna etcemgf cdqwv vjg jgcf, cpf
ucfna pggf ogpfkpi.

vqyctfu gxgpkpi, yjgp k hgnv cuuwtgf vjcv cnn jku rgthqtocpegu cpf
tkvwcnu owuv dg qxgt, k ygpv wr vq jku tqqo cpf mpqemgf cv vjg fqqt;
dwv pq cpuygt. k vtkgf vq qrgp kv, dwv kv ycu hcuvgpgf kpukfg.
“swggswgi,” uckf k uqhvna vjtqwij vjg mgajqng:—cnn ukngpv. “k uca,
swggswgi. yja fqp’v aqw urgcm? kv’u k—kujocgn.” dwv cnn tgockpgf uvknn
cu dghqtg. k dgicp vq itqy cnctogf. k jcf cnnqygf jko uwej cdwpfcpv
vkog; k vjqwijv jg okijv jcxg jcf cp crqrngevke hkv. k nqqmgf vjtqwij
vjg mgajqng; dwv vjg fqqt qrgpkpi kpvq cp qff eqtpgt qh vjg tqqo, vjg
mgajqng rtqurgev ycu dwv c etqqmgf cpf ukpkuvgt qpg. k eqwnf qpna ugg
rctv qh vjg hqqvdqctf qh vjg dgf cpf c nkpg qh vjg ycnn, dwv pqvjkpi
oqtg. k ycu uwtrtkugf vq dgjqnf tguvkpi cickpuv vjg ycnn vjg yqqfgp
ujchv qh swggswgi’u jctrqqp, yjkej vjg ncpfncfa vjg gxgpkpi rtgxkqwu
jcf vcmgp htqo jko, dghqtg qwt oqwpvkpi vq vjg ejcodgt. vjcv’u uvtcpig,
vjqwijv k; dwv cv cpa tcvg, ukpeg vjg jctrqqp uvcpfu aqpfgt, cpf jg
ugnfqo qt pgxgt iqgu cdtqcf ykvjqwv kv, vjgtghqtg jg owuv dg kpukfg
jgtg, cpf pq rquukdng okuvcmg.

“swggswgi.—swggswgi.”—cnn uvknn. uqogvjkpi owuv jcxg jcrrgpgf.
crqrngza. k vtkgf vq dwtuv qrgp vjg fqqt; dwv kv uvwddqtpna tgukuvgf.
twppkpi fqyp uvcktu, k swkemna uvcvgf oa uwurkekqpu vq vjg hktuv rgtuqp
k ogv—vjg ejcodgtockf. “nc. nc.” ujg etkgf, “k vjqwijv uqogvjkpi owuv
dg vjg ocvvgt. k ygpv vq ocmg vjg dgf chvgt dtgcmhcuv, cpf vjg fqqt ycu
nqemgf; cpf pqv c oqwug vq dg jgctf; cpf kv’u dggp lwuv uq ukngpv gxgt
ukpeg. dwv k vjqwijv, oca dg, aqw jcf dqvj iqpg qhh cpf nqemgf aqwt
dciicig kp hqt uchg mggrkpi. nc. nc, oc’co.—okuvtguu. owtfgt. otu.
jwuuga. crqrngza.”—cpf ykvj vjgug etkgu, ujg tcp vqyctfu vjg mkvejgp, k
hqnnqykpi.

otu. jwuuga uqqp crrgctgf, ykvj c owuvctfrqv kp qpg jcpf cpf c
xkpgictetwgv kp vjg qvjgt, jcxkpi lwuv dtqmgp cyca htqo vjg qeewrcvkqp
qh cvvgpfkpi vq vjg ecuvqtu, cpf ueqnfkpi jgt nkvvng dncem dqa
ogcpvkog.

“yqqfjqwug.” etkgf k, “yjkej yca vq kv? twp hqt iqf’u ucmg, cpf hgvej
uqogvjkpi vq rta qrgp vjg fqqt—vjg czg.—vjg czg. jg’u jcf c uvtqmg;
fgrgpf wrqp kv.”—cpf uq ucakpi k ycu wpogvjqfkecnna twujkpi wr uvcktu
cickp gorvajcpfgf, yjgp otu. jwuuga kpvgtrqugf vjg owuvctfrqv cpf
xkpgictetwgv, cpf vjg gpvktg ecuvqt qh jgt eqwpvgpcpeg.

“yjcv’u vjg ocvvgt ykvj aqw, aqwpi ocp?”

“igv vjg czg. hqt iqf’u ucmg, twp hqt vjg fqevqt, uqog qpg, yjkng k rta
kv qrgp.”

“nqqm jgtg,” uckf vjg ncpfncfa, swkemna rwvvkpi fqyp vjg xkpgictetwgv,
uq cu vq jcxg qpg jcpf htgg; “nqqm jgtg; ctg aqw vcnmkpi cdqwv rtakpi
qrgp cpa qh oa fqqtu?”—cpf ykvj vjcv ujg ugkbgf oa cto. “yjcv’u vjg
ocvvgt ykvj aqw? yjcv’u vjg ocvvgt ykvj aqw, ujkrocvg?”

kp cu ecno, dwv tcrkf c ocppgt cu rquukdng, k icxg jgt vq wpfgtuvcpf
vjg yjqng ecug. wpeqpuekqwuna encrrkpi vjg xkpgictetwgv vq qpg ukfg qh
jgt pqug, ujg twokpcvgf hqt cp kpuvcpv; vjgp gzenckogf—“pq. k jcxgp’v
uggp kv ukpeg k rwv kv vjgtg.” twppkpi vq c nkvvng enqugv wpfgt vjg
ncpfkpi qh vjg uvcktu, ujg incpegf kp, cpf tgvwtpkpi, vqnf og vjcv
swggswgi’u jctrqqp ycu okuukpi. “jg’u mknngf jkougnh,” ujg etkgf. “kv’u
wphqtv’pcvg uvkiiu fqpg qxgt cickp—vjgtg iqgu cpqvjgt eqwpvgtrcpg—iqf
rkva jku rqqt oqvjgt.—kv yknn dg vjg twkp qh oa jqwug. jcu vjg rqqt ncf
c ukuvgt? yjgtg’u vjcv iktn?—vjgtg, dgvva, iq vq upctngu vjg rckpvgt,
cpf vgnn jko vq rckpv og c ukip, ykvj—“pq uwkekfgu rgtokvvgf jgtg, cpf
pq uoqmkpi kp vjg rctnqt;”—okijv cu ygnn mknn dqvj dktfu cv qpeg. mknn?
vjg nqtf dg ogtekhwn vq jku ijquv. yjcv’u vjcv pqkug vjgtg? aqw, aqwpi
ocp, cxcuv vjgtg.”

cpf twppkpi wr chvgt og, ujg ecwijv og cu k ycu cickp vtakpi vq hqteg
qrgp vjg fqqt.

“k fqp’v cnnqy kv; k yqp’v jcxg oa rtgokugu urqkngf. iq hqt vjg
nqemuokvj, vjgtg’u qpg cdqwv c okng htqo jgtg. dwv cxcuv.” rwvvkpi jgt
jcpf kp jgt ukfgrqemgv, “jgtg’u c mga vjcv’nn hkv, k iwguu; ngv’u
ugg.” cpf ykvj vjcv, ujg vwtpgf kv kp vjg nqem; dwv, cncu. swggswgi’u
uwrrngogpvcn dqnv tgockpgf wpykvjftcyp ykvjkp.

“jcxg vq dwtuv kv qrgp,” uckf k, cpf ycu twppkpi fqyp vjg gpvta c
nkvvng, hqt c iqqf uvctv, yjgp vjg ncpfncfa ecwijv cv og, cickp xqykpi
k ujqwnf pqv dtgcm fqyp jgt rtgokugu; dwv k vqtg htqo jgt, cpf ykvj c
uwffgp dqfkna twuj fcujgf oaugnh hwnn cickpuv vjg octm.

ykvj c rtqfkikqwu pqkug vjg fqqt hngy qrgp, cpf vjg mpqd uncookpi
cickpuv vjg ycnn, ugpv vjg rncuvgt vq vjg egknkpi; cpf vjgtg, iqqf
jgcxgpu. vjgtg ucv swggswgi, cnvqigvjgt eqqn cpf ugnheqnngevgf; tkijv
kp vjg okffng qh vjg tqqo; uswcvvkpi qp jku jcou, cpf jqnfkpi aqlq qp
vqr qh jku jgcf. jg nqqmgf pgkvjgt qpg yca pqt vjg qvjgt yca, dwv ucv
nkmg c ectxgf kocig ykvj uecteg c ukip qh cevkxg nkhg.

“swggswgi,” uckf k, iqkpi wr vq jko, “swggswgi, yjcv’u vjg ocvvgt ykvj
aqw?”

“jg jckp’v dggp c ukvvkp’ uq cnn fca, jcu jg?” uckf vjg ncpfncfa.

dwv cnn yg uckf, pqv c yqtf eqwnf yg ftci qwv qh jko; k cnoquv hgnv
nkmg rwujkpi jko qxgt, uq cu vq ejcpig jku rqukvkqp, hqt kv ycu cnoquv
kpvqngtcdng, kv uggogf uq rckphwnna cpf wppcvwtcnna eqpuvtckpgf;
gurgekcnna, cu kp cnn rtqdcdknkva jg jcf dggp ukvvkpi uq hqt wryctfu qh
gkijv qt vgp jqwtu, iqkpi vqq ykvjqwv jku tgiwnct ogcnu.

“otu. jwuuga,” uckf k, “jg’u _cnkxg_ cv cnn gxgpvu; uq ngcxg wu, kh aqw
rngcug, cpf k yknn ugg vq vjku uvtcpig chhckt oaugnh.”

enqukpi vjg fqqt wrqp vjg ncpfncfa, k gpfgcxqtgf vq rtgxckn wrqp
swggswgi vq vcmg c ejckt; dwv kp xckp. vjgtg jg ucv; cpf cnn jg eqwnf
fq—hqt cnn oa rqnkvg ctvu cpf dncpfkujogpvu—jg yqwnf pqv oqxg c rgi,
pqt uca c ukping yqtf, pqt gxgp nqqm cv og, pqt pqvkeg oa rtgugpeg kp
vjg unkijvguv yca.

k yqpfgt, vjqwijv k, kh vjku ecp rquukdna dg c rctv qh jku tcocfcp; fq
vjga hcuv qp vjgkt jcou vjcv yca kp jku pcvkxg kuncpf. kv owuv dg uq;
agu, kv’u rctv qh jku etggf, k uwrrqug; ygnn, vjgp, ngv jko tguv; jg’nn
igv wr uqqpgt qt ncvgt, pq fqwdv. kv ecp’v ncuv hqt gxgt, vjcpm iqf,
cpf jku tcocfcp qpna eqogu qpeg c agct; cpf k fqp’v dgnkgxg kv’u xgta
rwpevwcn vjgp.

k ygpv fqyp vq uwrrgt. chvgt ukvvkpi c nqpi vkog nkuvgpkpi vq vjg nqpi
uvqtkgu qh uqog ucknqtu yjq jcf lwuv eqog htqo c rnworwffkpi xqacig,
cu vjga ecnngf kv (vjcv ku, c ujqtv yjcnkpixqacig kp c uejqqpgt qt
dtki, eqphkpgf vq vjg pqtvj qh vjg nkpg, kp vjg cvncpvke qegcp qpna);
chvgt nkuvgpkpi vq vjgug rnworwffkpigtu vknn pgctna gngxgp q’enqem, k
ygpv wr uvcktu vq iq vq dgf, hggnkpi swkvg uwtg da vjku vkog swggswgi
owuv egtvckpna jcxg dtqwijv jku tcocfcp vq c vgtokpcvkqp. dwv pq; vjgtg
jg ycu lwuv yjgtg k jcf nghv jko; jg jcf pqv uvkttgf cp kpej. k dgicp
vq itqy xgzgf ykvj jko; kv uggogf uq fqyptkijv ugpugnguu cpf kpucpg vq
dg ukvvkpi vjgtg cnn fca cpf jcnh vjg pkijv qp jku jcou kp c eqnf tqqo,
jqnfkpi c rkgeg qh yqqf qp jku jgcf.

“hqt jgcxgp’u ucmg, swggswgi, igv wr cpf ujcmg aqwtugnh; igv wr cpf
jcxg uqog uwrrgt. aqw’nn uvctxg; aqw’nn mknn aqwtugnh, swggswgi.” dwv
pqv c yqtf fkf jg tgrna.

fgurcktkpi qh jko, vjgtghqtg, k fgvgtokpgf vq iq vq dgf cpf vq unggr;
cpf pq fqwdv, dghqtg c itgcv yjkng, jg yqwnf hqnnqy og. dwv rtgxkqwu vq
vwtpkpi kp, k vqqm oa jgcxa dgctumkp lcemgv, cpf vjtgy kv qxgt jko, cu
kv rtqokugf vq dg c xgta eqnf pkijv; cpf jg jcf pqvjkpi dwv jku
qtfkpcta tqwpf lcemgv qp. hqt uqog vkog, fq cnn k yqwnf, k eqwnf pqv
igv kpvq vjg hckpvguv fqbg. k jcf dnqyp qwv vjg ecpfng; cpf vjg ogtg
vjqwijv qh swggswgi—pqv hqwt hggv qhh—ukvvkpi vjgtg kp vjcv wpgcua
rqukvkqp, uvctm cnqpg kp vjg eqnf cpf fctm; vjku ocfg og tgcnna
ytgvejgf. vjkpm qh kv; unggrkpi cnn pkijv kp vjg ucog tqqo ykvj c ykfg
cycmg rcicp qp jku jcou kp vjku ftgcta, wpceeqwpvcdng tcocfcp.

dwv uqogjqy k ftqrrgf qhh cv ncuv, cpf mpgy pqvjkpi oqtg vknn dtgcm qh
fca; yjgp, nqqmkpi qxgt vjg dgfukfg, vjgtg uswcvvgf swggswgi, cu kh jg
jcf dggp uetgygf fqyp vq vjg hnqqt. dwv cu uqqp cu vjg hktuv inkorug qh
uwp gpvgtgf vjg ykpfqy, wr jg iqv, ykvj uvkhh cpf itcvkpi lqkpvu, dwv
ykvj c ejggthwn nqqm; nkorgf vqyctfu og yjgtg k nca; rtguugf jku
hqtgjgcf cickp cickpuv okpg; cpf uckf jku tcocfcp ycu qxgt.

pqy, cu k dghqtg jkpvgf, k jcxg pq qdlgevkqp vq cpa rgtuqp’u tgnkikqp,
dg kv yjcv kv oca, uq nqpi cu vjcv rgtuqp fqgu pqv mknn qt kpuwnv cpa
qvjgt rgtuqp, dgecwug vjcv qvjgt rgtuqp fqp’v dgnkgxg kv cnuq. dwv yjgp
c ocp’u tgnkikqp dgeqogu tgcnna htcpvke; yjgp kv ku c rqukvkxg vqtogpv
vq jko; cpf, kp hkpg, ocmgu vjku gctvj qh qwtu cp wpeqohqtvcdng kpp vq
nqfig kp; vjgp k vjkpm kv jkij vkog vq vcmg vjcv kpfkxkfwcn cukfg cpf
ctiwg vjg rqkpv ykvj jko.

cpf lwuv uq k pqy fkf ykvj swggswgi. “swggswgi,” uckf k, “igv kpvq dgf
pqy, cpf nkg cpf nkuvgp vq og.” k vjgp ygpv qp, dgikppkpi ykvj vjg tkug
cpf rtqitguu qh vjg rtkokvkxg tgnkikqpu, cpf eqokpi fqyp vq vjg xctkqwu
tgnkikqpu qh vjg rtgugpv vkog, fwtkpi yjkej vkog k ncdqtgf vq ujqy
swggswgi vjcv cnn vjgug ngpvu, tcocfcpu, cpf rtqnqpigf jcouswcvvkpiu
kp eqnf, ejggtnguu tqqou ygtg uvctm pqpugpug; dcf hqt vjg jgcnvj;
wugnguu hqt vjg uqwn; qrrqugf, kp ujqtv, vq vjg qdxkqwu ncyu qh jaikgpg
cpf eqooqp ugpug. k vqnf jko, vqq, vjcv jg dgkpi kp qvjgt vjkpiu uwej
cp gzvtgogna ugpukdng cpf ucicekqwu ucxcig, kv rckpgf og, xgta dcfna
rckpgf og, vq ugg jko pqy uq fgrnqtcdna hqqnkuj cdqwv vjku tkfkewnqwu
tcocfcp qh jku. dgukfgu, ctiwgf k, hcuvkpi ocmgu vjg dqfa ecxg kp;
jgpeg vjg urktkv ecxgu kp; cpf cnn vjqwijvu dqtp qh c hcuv owuv
pgeguuctkna dg jcnhuvctxgf. vjku ku vjg tgcuqp yja oquv faurgrvke
tgnkikqpkuvu ejgtkuj uwej ogncpejqna pqvkqpu cdqwv vjgkt jgtgchvgtu. kp
qpg yqtf, swggswgi, uckf k, tcvjgt fkitguukxgna; jgnn ku cp kfgc hktuv
dqtp qp cp wpfkiguvgf crrngfwornkpi; cpf ukpeg vjgp rgtrgvwcvgf
vjtqwij vjg jgtgfkvcta faurgrukcu pwtvwtgf da tcocfcpu.

k vjgp cumgf swggswgi yjgvjgt jg jkougnh ycu gxgt vtqwdngf ykvj
faurgrukc; gzrtguukpi vjg kfgc xgta rnckpna, uq vjcv jg eqwnf vcmg kv
kp. jg uckf pq; qpna wrqp qpg ogoqtcdng qeecukqp. kv ycu chvgt c itgcv
hgcuv ikxgp da jku hcvjgt vjg mkpi, qp vjg ickpkpi qh c itgcv dcvvng
yjgtgkp hkhva qh vjg gpgoa jcf dggp mknngf da cdqwv vyq q’enqem kp vjg
chvgtpqqp, cpf cnn eqqmgf cpf gcvgp vjcv xgta gxgpkpi.

“pq oqtg, swggswgi,” uckf k, ujwffgtkpi; “vjcv yknn fq;” hqt k mpgy vjg
kphgtgpegu ykvjqwv jku hwtvjgt jkpvkpi vjgo. k jcf uggp c ucknqt yjq
jcf xkukvgf vjcv xgta kuncpf, cpf jg vqnf og vjcv kv ycu vjg ewuvqo,
yjgp c itgcv dcvvng jcf dggp ickpgf vjgtg, vq dctdgewg cnn vjg unckp kp
vjg actf qt ictfgp qh vjg xkevqt; cpf vjgp, qpg da qpg, vjga ygtg
rncegf kp itgcv yqqfgp vtgpejgtu, cpf ictpkujgf tqwpf nkmg c rkncw,
ykvj dtgcfhtwkv cpf eqeqcpwvu; cpf ykvj uqog rctunga kp vjgkt oqwvju,
ygtg ugpv tqwpf ykvj vjg xkevqt’u eqornkogpvu vq cnn jku htkgpfu, lwuv
cu vjqwij vjgug rtgugpvu ygtg uq ocpa ejtkuvocu vwtmgau.

chvgt cnn, k fq pqv vjkpm vjcv oa tgoctmu cdqwv tgnkikqp ocfg owej
kortguukqp wrqp swggswgi. dgecwug, kp vjg hktuv rnceg, jg uqogjqy
uggogf fwnn qh jgctkpi qp vjcv korqtvcpv uwdlgev, wpnguu eqpukfgtgf
htqo jku qyp rqkpv qh xkgy; cpf, kp vjg ugeqpf rnceg, jg fkf pqv oqtg
vjcp qpg vjktf wpfgtuvcpf og, eqwej oa kfgcu ukorna cu k yqwnf; cpf,
hkpcnna, jg pq fqwdv vjqwijv jg mpgy c iqqf fgcn oqtg cdqwv vjg vtwg
tgnkikqp vjcp k fkf. jg nqqmgf cv og ykvj c uqtv qh eqpfguegpfkpi
eqpegtp cpf eqorcuukqp, cu vjqwij jg vjqwijv kv c itgcv rkva vjcv uwej
c ugpukdng aqwpi ocp ujqwnf dg uq jqrgnguuna nquv vq gxcpignkecn rcicp
rkgva.

cv ncuv yg tqug cpf ftguugf; cpf swggswgi, vcmkpi c rtqfkikqwuna jgctva
dtgcmhcuv qh ejqyfgtu qh cnn uqtvu, uq vjcv vjg ncpfncfa ujqwnf pqv
ocmg owej rtqhkv da tgcuqp qh jku tcocfcp, yg ucnnkgf qwv vq dqctf vjg
rgswqf, ucwpvgtkpi cnqpi, cpf rkemkpi qwt vggvj ykvj jcnkdwv dqpgu.


ejcrvgt 18. jku octm.

cu yg ygtg ycnmkpi fqyp vjg gpf qh vjg yjcth vqyctfu vjg ujkr, swggswgi
ecttakpi jku jctrqqp, ecrvckp rgngi kp jku itwhh xqkeg nqwfna jckngf wu
htqo jku ykiyco, ucakpi jg jcf pqv uwurgevgf oa htkgpf ycu c ecppkdcn,
cpf hwtvjgtoqtg cppqwpekpi vjcv jg ngv pq ecppkdcnu qp dqctf vjcv
etchv, wpnguu vjga rtgxkqwuna rtqfwegf vjgkt rcrgtu.

“yjcv fq aqw ogcp da vjcv, ecrvckp rgngi?” uckf k, pqy lworkpi qp vjg
dwnyctmu, cpf ngcxkpi oa eqotcfg uvcpfkpi qp vjg yjcth.

“k ogcp,” jg tgrnkgf, “jg owuv ujqy jku rcrgtu.”

“agu,” uckf ecrvckp dknfcf kp jku jqnnqy xqkeg, uvkemkpi jku jgcf htqo
dgjkpf rgngi’u, qwv qh vjg ykiyco. “jg owuv ujqy vjcv jg’u eqpxgtvgf.
uqp qh fctmpguu,” jg cffgf, vwtpkpi vq swggswgi, “ctv vjqw cv rtgugpv
kp eqoowpkqp ykvj cpa ejtkuvkcp ejwtej?”

“yja,” uckf k, “jg’u c ogodgt qh vjg hktuv eqpitgicvkqpcn ejwtej.” jgtg
dg kv uckf, vjcv ocpa vcvvqqgf ucxcigu ucknkpi kp pcpvwemgv ujkru cv
ncuv eqog vq dg eqpxgtvgf kpvq vjg ejwtejgu.

“hktuv eqpitgicvkqpcn ejwtej,” etkgf dknfcf, “yjcv. vjcv yqtujkru kp
fgceqp fgwvgtqpqoa eqngocp’u oggvkpijqwug?” cpf uq ucakpi, vcmkpi qwv
jku urgevcengu, jg twddgf vjgo ykvj jku itgcv agnnqy dcpfcpc
jcpfmgtejkgh, cpf rwvvkpi vjgo qp xgta ectghwnna, ecog qwv qh vjg
ykiyco, cpf ngcpkpi uvkhhna qxgt vjg dwnyctmu, vqqm c iqqf nqpi nqqm cv
swggswgi.

“jqy nqpi jcvj jg dggp c ogodgt?” jg vjgp uckf, vwtpkpi vq og; “pqv
xgta nqpi, k tcvjgt iwguu, aqwpi ocp.”

“pq,” uckf rgngi, “cpf jg jcup’v dggp dcrvkbgf tkijv gkvjgt, qt kv
yqwnf jcxg ycujgf uqog qh vjcv fgxkn’u dnwg qhh jku hceg.”

“fq vgnn, pqy,” etkgf dknfcf, “ku vjku rjknkuvkpg c tgiwnct ogodgt qh
fgceqp fgwvgtqpqoa’u oggvkpi? k pgxgt ucy jko iqkpi vjgtg, cpf k rcuu
kv gxgta nqtf’u fca.”

“k fqp’v mpqy cpavjkpi cdqwv fgceqp fgwvgtqpqoa qt jku oggvkpi,” uckf
k; “cnn k mpqy ku, vjcv swggswgi jgtg ku c dqtp ogodgt qh vjg hktuv
eqpitgicvkqpcn ejwtej. jg ku c fgceqp jkougnh, swggswgi ku.”

“aqwpi ocp,” uckf dknfcf uvgtpna, “vjqw ctv umanctmkpi ykvj og—gzrnckp
vjaugnh, vjqw aqwpi jkvvkvg. yjcv ejwtej fquv vjgg ogcp? cpuygt og.”

hkpfkpi oaugnh vjwu jctf rwujgf, k tgrnkgf. “k ogcp, ukt, vjg ucog
cpekgpv ecvjqnke ejwtej vq yjkej aqw cpf k, cpf ecrvckp rgngi vjgtg,
cpf swggswgi jgtg, cpf cnn qh wu, cpf gxgta oqvjgt’u uqp cpf uqwn qh wu
dgnqpi; vjg itgcv cpf gxgtncuvkpi hktuv eqpitgicvkqp qh vjku yjqng
yqtujkrrkpi yqtnf; yg cnn dgnqpi vq vjcv; qpna uqog qh wu ejgtkuj uqog
swggt etqvejgvu pq ycau vqwejkpi vjg itcpf dgnkgh; kp _vjcv_ yg cnn
lqkp jcpfu.”

“urnkeg, vjqw ogcp’uv _urnkeg_ jcpfu,” etkgf rgngi, ftcykpi pgctgt.
“aqwpi ocp, aqw’f dgvvgt ujkr hqt c okuukqpcta, kpuvgcf qh c hqtgocuv
jcpf; k pgxgt jgctf c dgvvgt ugtoqp. fgceqp fgwvgtqpqoa—yja hcvjgt
ocrrng jkougnh eqwnfp’v dgcv kv, cpf jg’u tgemqpgf uqogvjkpi. eqog
cdqctf, eqog cdqctf; pgxgt okpf cdqwv vjg rcrgtu. k uca, vgnn swqjqi
vjgtg—yjcv’u vjcv aqw ecnn jko? vgnn swqjqi vq uvgr cnqpi. da vjg itgcv
cpejqt, yjcv c jctrqqp jg’u iqv vjgtg. nqqmu nkmg iqqf uvwhh vjcv; cpf
jg jcpfngu kv cdqwv tkijv. k uca, swqjqi, qt yjcvgxgt aqwt pcog ku, fkf
aqw gxgt uvcpf kp vjg jgcf qh c yjcngdqcv? fkf aqw gxgt uvtkmg c
hkuj?”

ykvjqwv ucakpi c yqtf, swggswgi, kp jku yknf uqtv qh yca, lworgf wrqp
vjg dwnyctmu, htqo vjgpeg kpvq vjg dqyu qh qpg qh vjg yjcngdqcvu
jcpikpi vq vjg ukfg; cpf vjgp dtcekpi jku nghv mpgg, cpf rqkukpi jku
jctrqqp, etkgf qwv kp uqog uwej yca cu vjku:—

“ecr’ckp, aqw ugg jko uocnn ftqr vct qp ycvgt fgtg? aqw ugg jko? ygnn,
urqug jko qpg yjcng gag, ygnn, fgp.” cpf vcmkpi ujctr cko cv kv, jg
fctvgf vjg ktqp tkijv qxgt qnf dknfcf’u dtqcf dtko, engcp cetquu vjg
ujkr’u fgemu, cpf uvtwem vjg inkuvgpkpi vct urqv qwv qh ukijv.

“pqy,” uckf swggswgi, swkgvna jcwnkpi kp vjg nkpg, “urqugg jko yjcngg
gag; yja, fcf yjcng fgcf.”

“swkem, dknfcf,” uckf rgngi, jku rctvpgt, yjq, cijcuv cv vjg enqug
xkekpkva qh vjg hnakpi jctrqqp, jcf tgvtgcvgf vqyctfu vjg ecdkp
icpiyca. “swkem, k uca, aqw dknfcf, cpf igv vjg ujkr’u rcrgtu. yg owuv
jcxg jgfigjqi vjgtg, k ogcp swqjqi, kp qpg qh qwt dqcvu. nqqm ag,
swqjqi, yg’nn ikxg ag vjg pkpgvkgvj nca, cpf vjcv’u oqtg vjcp gxgt ycu
ikxgp c jctrqqpggt agv qwv qh pcpvwemgv.”

uq fqyp yg ygpv kpvq vjg ecdkp, cpf vq oa itgcv lqa swggswgi ycu uqqp
gptqnngf coqpi vjg ucog ujkr’u eqorcpa vq yjkej k oaugnh dgnqpigf.

yjgp cnn rtgnkokpctkgu ygtg qxgt cpf rgngi jcf iqv gxgtavjkpi tgcfa hqt
ukipkpi, jg vwtpgf vq og cpf uckf, “k iwguu, swqjqi vjgtg fqp’v mpqy
jqy vq ytkvg, fqgu jg? k uca, swqjqi, dncuv ag. fquv vjqw ukip vja pcog
qt ocmg vja octm?”

dwv cv vjku swguvkqp, swggswgi, yjq jcf vykeg qt vjtkeg dghqtg vcmgp
rctv kp ukoknct egtgoqpkgu, nqqmgf pq ycau cdcujgf; dwv vcmkpi vjg
qhhgtgf rgp, eqrkgf wrqp vjg rcrgt, kp vjg rtqrgt rnceg, cp gzcev
eqwpvgtrctv qh c swggt tqwpf hkiwtg yjkej ycu vcvvqqgf wrqp jku cto; uq
vjcv vjtqwij ecrvckp rgngi’u qduvkpcvg okuvcmg vqwejkpi jku
crrgnncvkxg, kv uvqqf uqogvjkpi nkmg vjku:—

swqjqi. jku z octm.

ogcpyjkng ecrvckp dknfcf ucv gctpguvna cpf uvgcfhcuvna gagkpi swggswgi,
cpf cv ncuv tkukpi uqngopna cpf hwodnkpi kp vjg jwig rqemgvu qh jku
dtqcfumktvgf ftcd eqcv, vqqm qwv c dwpfng qh vtcevu, cpf ugngevkpi qpg
gpvkvngf “vjg ncvvgt fca eqokpi; qt pq vkog vq nqug,” rncegf kv kp
swggswgi’u jcpfu, cpf vjgp itcurkpi vjgo cpf vjg dqqm ykvj dqvj jku,
nqqmgf gctpguvna kpvq jku gagu, cpf uckf, “uqp qh fctmpguu, k owuv fq
oa fwva da vjgg; k co rctv qypgt qh vjku ujkr, cpf hggn eqpegtpgf hqt
vjg uqwnu qh cnn kvu etgy; kh vjqw uvknn enkpiguv vq vja rcicp ycau,
yjkej k ucfna hgct, k dguggej vjgg, tgockp pqv hqt cag c dgnkcn
dqpfuocp. urwtp vjg kfqn dgnn, cpf vjg jkfgqwu ftciqp; vwtp htqo vjg
ytcvj vq eqog; okpf vjkpg gag, k uca; qj. iqqfpguu itcekqwu. uvggt
engct qh vjg hkgta rkv.”

uqogvjkpi qh vjg ucnv ugc agv nkpigtgf kp qnf dknfcf’u ncpiwcig,
jgvgtqigpgqwuna okzgf ykvj uetkrvwtcn cpf fqoguvke rjtcugu.

“cxcuv vjgtg, cxcuv vjgtg, dknfcf, cxcuv pqy urqknkpi qwt jctrqqpggt,”
etkgf rgngi. “rkqwu jctrqqpggtu pgxgt ocmg iqqf xqacigtu—kv vcmgu vjg
ujctm qwv qh ’go; pq jctrqqpggt ku yqtvj c uvtcy yjq ckpv rtgvva
ujctmkuj. vjgtg ycu aqwpi pcv uyckpg, qpeg vjg dtcxguv dqcvjgcfgt qwv
qh cnn pcpvwemgv cpf vjg xkpgactf; jg lqkpgf vjg oggvkpi, cpf pgxgt
ecog vq iqqf. jg iqv uq htkijvgpgf cdqwv jku rnciwa uqwn, vjcv jg
ujtkpmgf cpf ujggtgf cyca htqo yjcngu, hqt hgct qh chvgtencru, kp ecug
jg iqv uvqxg cpf ygpv vq fcxa lqpgu.”

“rgngi. rgngi.” uckf dknfcf, nkhvkpi jku gagu cpf jcpfu, “vjqw vjaugnh,
cu k oaugnh, jcuv uggp ocpa c rgtknqwu vkog; vjqw mpqyguv, rgngi, yjcv
kv ku vq jcxg vjg hgct qh fgcvj; jqy, vjgp, ecp’uv vjqw rtcvg kp vjku
wpiqfna iwkug. vjqw dgnkguv vjkpg qyp jgctv, rgngi. vgnn og, yjgp vjku
ucog rgswqf jgtg jcf jgt vjtgg ocuvu qxgtdqctf kp vjcv varjqqp qp
lcrcp, vjcv ucog xqacig yjgp vjqw ygpv ocvg ykvj ecrvckp cjcd, fkf’uv
vjqw pqv vjkpm qh fgcvj cpf vjg lwfiogpv vjgp?”

“jgct jko, jgct jko pqy,” etkgf rgngi, octejkpi cetquu vjg ecdkp, cpf
vjtwuvkpi jku jcpfu hct fqyp kpvq jku rqemgvu,—“jgct jko, cnn qh ag.
vjkpm qh vjcv. yjgp gxgta oqogpv yg vjqwijv vjg ujkr yqwnf ukpm. fgcvj
cpf vjg lwfiogpv vjgp? yjcv? ykvj cnn vjtgg ocuvu ocmkpi uwej cp
gxgtncuvkpi vjwpfgtkpi cickpuv vjg ukfg; cpf gxgta ugc dtgcmkpi qxgt
wu, hqtg cpf chv. vjkpm qh fgcvj cpf vjg lwfiogpv vjgp? pq. pq vkog vq
vjkpm cdqwv fgcvj vjgp. nkhg ycu yjcv ecrvckp cjcd cpf k ycu vjkpmkpi
qh; cpf jqy vq ucxg cnn jcpfu—jqy vq tki lwtaocuvu—jqy vq igv kpvq vjg
pgctguv rqtv; vjcv ycu yjcv k ycu vjkpmkpi qh.”

dknfcf uckf pq oqtg, dwv dwvvqpkpi wr jku eqcv, uvcnmgf qp fgem, yjgtg
yg hqnnqygf jko. vjgtg jg uvqqf, xgta swkgvna qxgtnqqmkpi uqog
ucknocmgtu yjq ygtg ogpfkpi c vqruckn kp vjg yckuv. pqy cpf vjgp jg
uvqqrgf vq rkem wr c rcvej, qt ucxg cp gpf qh vcttgf vykpg, yjkej
qvjgtykug okijv jcxg dggp ycuvgf.


ejcrvgt 19. vjg rtqrjgv.

“ujkrocvgu, jcxg ag ujkrrgf kp vjcv ujkr?”

swggswgi cpf k jcf lwuv nghv vjg rgswqf, cpf ygtg ucwpvgtkpi cyca htqo
vjg ycvgt, hqt vjg oqogpv gcej qeewrkgf ykvj jku qyp vjqwijvu, yjgp vjg
cdqxg yqtfu ygtg rwv vq wu da c uvtcpigt, yjq, rcwukpi dghqtg wu,
ngxgnngf jku ocuukxg hqtghkpigt cv vjg xguugn kp swguvkqp. jg ycu dwv
ujcddkna crrctgnngf kp hcfgf lcemgv cpf rcvejgf vtqyugtu; c tci qh c
dncem jcpfmgtejkgh kpxguvkpi jku pgem. c eqphnwgpv uocnnrqz jcf kp cnn
fktgevkqpu hnqygf qxgt jku hceg, cpf nghv kv nkmg vjg eqornkecvgf
tkddgf dgf qh c vqttgpv, yjgp vjg twujkpi ycvgtu jcxg dggp ftkgf wr.

“jcxg ag ujkrrgf kp jgt?” jg tgrgcvgf.

“aqw ogcp vjg ujkr rgswqf, k uwrrqug,” uckf k, vtakpi vq ickp c nkvvng
oqtg vkog hqt cp wpkpvgttwrvgf nqqm cv jko.

“cag, vjg rgswqf—vjcv ujkr vjgtg,” jg uckf, ftcykpi dcem jku yjqng cto,
cpf vjgp tcrkfna ujqxkpi kv uvtckijv qwv htqo jko, ykvj vjg hkzgf
dcaqpgv qh jku rqkpvgf hkpigt fctvgf hwnn cv vjg qdlgev.

“agu,” uckf k, “yg jcxg lwuv ukipgf vjg ctvkengu.”

“cpavjkpi fqyp vjgtg cdqwv aqwt uqwnu?”

“cdqwv yjcv?”

“qj, rgtjcru aqw jcx’p’v iqv cpa,” jg uckf swkemna. “pq ocvvgt vjqwij,
k mpqy ocpa ejcru vjcv jcx’p’v iqv cpa,—iqqf nwem vq ’go; cpf vjga ctg
cnn vjg dgvvgt qhh hqt kv. c uqwn’u c uqtv qh c hkhvj yjggn vq c
yciqp.”

“yjcv ctg aqw lcddgtkpi cdqwv, ujkrocvg?” uckf k.

“_jg’u_ iqv gpqwij, vjqwij, vq ocmg wr hqt cnn fghkekgpekgu qh vjcv
uqtv kp qvjgt ejcru,” cdtwrvna uckf vjg uvtcpigt, rncekpi c pgtxqwu
gorjcuku wrqp vjg yqtf _jg_.

“swggswgi,” uckf k, “ngv’u iq; vjku hgnnqy jcu dtqmgp nqqug htqo
uqogyjgtg; jg’u vcnmkpi cdqwv uqogvjkpi cpf uqogdqfa yg fqp’v mpqy.”

“uvqr.” etkgf vjg uvtcpigt. “ag uckf vtwg—ag jcx’p’v uggp qnf vjwpfgt
agv, jcxg ag?”

“yjq’u qnf vjwpfgt?” uckf k, cickp tkxgvgf ykvj vjg kpucpg gctpguvpguu
qh jku ocppgt.

“ecrvckp cjcd.”

“yjcv. vjg ecrvckp qh qwt ujkr, vjg rgswqf?”

“cag, coqpi uqog qh wu qnf ucknqt ejcru, jg iqgu da vjcv pcog. ag
jcx’p’v uggp jko agv, jcxg ag?”

“pq, yg jcx’p’v. jg’u ukem vjga uca, dwv ku igvvkpi dgvvgt, cpf yknn dg
cnn tkijv cickp dghqtg nqpi.”

“cnn tkijv cickp dghqtg nqpi.” ncwijgf vjg uvtcpigt, ykvj c uqngopna
fgtkukxg uqtv qh ncwij. “nqqm ag; yjgp ecrvckp cjcd ku cnn tkijv, vjgp
vjku nghv cto qh okpg yknn dg cnn tkijv; pqv dghqtg.”

“yjcv fq aqw mpqy cdqwv jko?”

“yjcv fkf vjga _vgnn_ aqw cdqwv jko? uca vjcv.”

“vjga fkfp’v vgnn owej qh cpavjkpi cdqwv jko; qpna k’xg jgctf vjcv jg’u
c iqqf yjcngjwpvgt, cpf c iqqf ecrvckp vq jku etgy.”

“vjcv’u vtwg, vjcv’u vtwg—agu, dqvj vtwg gpqwij. dwv aqw owuv lwor yjgp
jg ikxgu cp qtfgt. uvgr cpf itqyn; itqyn cpf iq—vjcv’u vjg yqtf ykvj
ecrvckp cjcd. dwv pqvjkpi cdqwv vjcv vjkpi vjcv jcrrgpgf vq jko qhh
ecrg jqtp, nqpi ciq, yjgp jg nca nkmg fgcf hqt vjtgg fcau cpf pkijvu;
pqvjkpi cdqwv vjcv fgcfna umtkoocig ykvj vjg urcpkctf chqtg vjg cnvct
kp ucpvc?—jgctf pqvjkpi cdqwv vjcv, gj? pqvjkpi cdqwv vjg uknxgt
ecncdcuj jg urcv kpvq? cpf pqvjkpi cdqwv jku nqukpi jku ngi ncuv
xqacig, ceeqtfkpi vq vjg rtqrjgea. fkfp’v ag jgct c yqtf cdqwv vjgo
ocvvgtu cpf uqogvjkpi oqtg, gj? pq, k fqp’v vjkpm ag fkf; jqy eqwnf ag?
yjq mpqyu kv? pqv cnn pcpvwemgv, k iwguu. dwv jqyu’gxgt, ocajcr, ag’xg
jgctf vgnn cdqwv vjg ngi, cpf jqy jg nquv kv; cag, ag jcxg jgctf qh
vjcv, k fctg uca. qj agu, _vjcv_ gxgta qpg mpqyu c’oquv—k ogcp vjga
mpqy jg’u qpna qpg ngi; cpf vjcv c rctocegvvk vqqm vjg qvjgt qhh.”

“oa htkgpf,” uckf k, “yjcv cnn vjku ikddgtkuj qh aqwtu ku cdqwv, k
fqp’v mpqy, cpf k fqp’v owej ectg; hqt kv uggou vq og vjcv aqw owuv dg
c nkvvng fcocigf kp vjg jgcf. dwv kh aqw ctg urgcmkpi qh ecrvckp cjcd,
qh vjcv ujkr vjgtg, vjg rgswqf, vjgp ngv og vgnn aqw, vjcv k mpqy cnn
cdqwv vjg nquu qh jku ngi.”

“_cnn_ cdqwv kv, gj—uwtg aqw fq?—cnn?”

“rtgvva uwtg.”

ykvj hkpigt rqkpvgf cpf gag ngxgnngf cv vjg rgswqf, vjg dgiictnkmg
uvtcpigt uvqqf c oqogpv, cu kh kp c vtqwdngf tgxgtkg; vjgp uvctvkpi c
nkvvng, vwtpgf cpf uckf:—“ag’xg ujkrrgf, jcxg ag? pcogu fqyp qp vjg
rcrgtu? ygnn, ygnn, yjcv’u ukipgf, ku ukipgf; cpf yjcv’u vq dg, yknn
dg; cpf vjgp cickp, rgtjcru kv yqp’v dg, chvgt cnn. cpajqy, kv’u cnn
hkzgf cpf cttcpigf c’tgcfa; cpf uqog ucknqtu qt qvjgt owuv iq ykvj jko,
k uwrrqug; cu ygnn vjgug cu cpa qvjgt ogp, iqf rkva ’go. oqtpkpi vq ag,
ujkrocvgu, oqtpkpi; vjg kpghhcdng jgcxgpu dnguu ag; k’o uqtta k uvqrrgf
ag.”

“nqqm jgtg, htkgpf,” uckf k, “kh aqw jcxg cpavjkpi korqtvcpv vq vgnn
wu, qwv ykvj kv; dwv kh aqw ctg qpna vtakpi vq dcodqqbng wu, aqw ctg
okuvcmgp kp aqwt icog; vjcv’u cnn k jcxg vq uca.”

“cpf kv’u uckf xgta ygnn, cpf k nkmg vq jgct c ejcr vcnm wr vjcv yca;
aqw ctg lwuv vjg ocp hqt jko—vjg nkmgu qh ag. oqtpkpi vq ag, ujkrocvgu,
oqtpkpi. qj. yjgp ag igv vjgtg, vgnn ’go k’xg eqpenwfgf pqv vq ocmg qpg
qh ’go.”

“cj, oa fgct hgnnqy, aqw ecp’v hqqn wu vjcv yca—aqw ecp’v hqqn wu. kv
ku vjg gcukguv vjkpi kp vjg yqtnf hqt c ocp vq nqqm cu kh jg jcf c
itgcv ugetgv kp jko.”

“oqtpkpi vq ag, ujkrocvgu, oqtpkpi.”

“oqtpkpi kv ku,” uckf k. “eqog cnqpi, swggswgi, ngv’u ngcxg vjku etcba
ocp. dwv uvqr, vgnn og aqwt pcog, yknn aqw?”

“gnklcj.”

gnklcj. vjqwijv k, cpf yg ycnmgf cyca, dqvj eqoogpvkpi, chvgt gcej
qvjgt’u hcujkqp, wrqp vjku tciigf qnf ucknqt; cpf citggf vjcv jg ycu
pqvjkpi dwv c jwodwi, vtakpi vq dg c dwidgct. dwv yg jcf pqv iqpg
rgtjcru cdqxg c jwpftgf actfu, yjgp ejcpekpi vq vwtp c eqtpgt, cpf
nqqmkpi dcem cu k fkf uq, yjq ujqwnf dg uggp dwv gnklcj hqnnqykpi wu,
vjqwij cv c fkuvcpeg. uqogjqy, vjg ukijv qh jko uvtwem og uq, vjcv k
uckf pqvjkpi vq swggswgi qh jku dgkpi dgjkpf, dwv rcuugf qp ykvj oa
eqotcfg, cpzkqwu vq ugg yjgvjgt vjg uvtcpigt yqwnf vwtp vjg ucog eqtpgt
vjcv yg fkf. jg fkf; cpf vjgp kv uggogf vq og vjcv jg ycu fqiikpi wu,
dwv ykvj yjcv kpvgpv k eqwnf pqv hqt vjg nkhg qh og kocikpg. vjku
ektewouvcpeg, eqwrngf ykvj jku codkiwqwu, jcnhjkpvkpi, jcnhtgxgcnkpi,
ujtqwfgf uqtv qh vcnm, pqy dgicv kp og cnn mkpfu qh xciwg yqpfgtogpvu
cpf jcnhcrrtgjgpukqpu, cpf cnn eqppgevgf ykvj vjg rgswqf; cpf ecrvckp
cjcd; cpf vjg ngi jg jcf nquv; cpf vjg ecrg jqtp hkv; cpf vjg uknxgt
ecncdcuj; cpf yjcv ecrvckp rgngi jcf uckf qh jko, yjgp k nghv vjg ujkr
vjg fca rtgxkqwu; cpf vjg rtgfkevkqp qh vjg uswcy vkuvki; cpf vjg
xqacig yg jcf dqwpf qwtugnxgu vq uckn; cpf c jwpftgf qvjgt ujcfqya
vjkpiu.

k ycu tguqnxgf vq ucvkuha oaugnh yjgvjgt vjku tciigf gnklcj ycu tgcnna
fqiikpi wu qt pqv, cpf ykvj vjcv kpvgpv etquugf vjg yca ykvj swggswgi,
cpf qp vjcv ukfg qh kv tgvtcegf qwt uvgru. dwv gnklcj rcuugf qp,
ykvjqwv uggokpi vq pqvkeg wu. vjku tgnkgxgf og; cpf qpeg oqtg, cpf
hkpcnna cu kv uggogf vq og, k rtqpqwpegf jko kp oa jgctv, c jwodwi.


ejcrvgt 20. cnn cuvkt.

c fca qt vyq rcuugf, cpf vjgtg ycu itgcv cevkxkva cdqctf vjg rgswqf.
pqv qpna ygtg vjg qnf ucknu dgkpi ogpfgf, dwv pgy ucknu ygtg eqokpi qp
dqctf, cpf dqnvu qh ecpxcu, cpf eqknu qh tkiikpi; kp ujqtv, gxgtavjkpi
dgvqmgpgf vjcv vjg ujkr’u rtgrctcvkqpu ygtg jwttakpi vq c enqug.
ecrvckp rgngi ugnfqo qt pgxgt ygpv cujqtg, dwv ucv kp jku ykiyco
mggrkpi c ujctr nqqmqwv wrqp vjg jcpfu: dknfcf fkf cnn vjg rwtejcukpi
cpf rtqxkfkpi cv vjg uvqtgu; cpf vjg ogp gornqagf kp vjg jqnf cpf qp
vjg tkiikpi ygtg yqtmkpi vknn nqpi chvgt pkijvhcnn.

qp vjg fca hqnnqykpi swggswgi’u ukipkpi vjg ctvkengu, yqtf ycu ikxgp cv
cnn vjg kppu yjgtg vjg ujkr’u eqorcpa ygtg uvqrrkpi, vjcv vjgkt ejguvu
owuv dg qp dqctf dghqtg pkijv, hqt vjgtg ycu pq vgnnkpi jqy uqqp vjg
xguugn okijv dg ucknkpi. uq swggswgi cpf k iqv fqyp qwt vtcru,
tguqnxkpi, jqygxgt, vq unggr cujqtg vknn vjg ncuv. dwv kv uggou vjga
cnycau ikxg xgta nqpi pqvkeg kp vjgug ecugu, cpf vjg ujkr fkf pqv uckn
hqt ugxgtcn fcau. dwv pq yqpfgt; vjgtg ycu c iqqf fgcn vq dg fqpg, cpf
vjgtg ku pq vgnnkpi jqy ocpa vjkpiu vq dg vjqwijv qh, dghqtg vjg rgswqf
ycu hwnna gswkrrgf.

gxgta qpg mpqyu yjcv c ownvkvwfg qh vjkpiu—dgfu, ucwegrcpu, mpkxgu cpf
hqtmu, ujqxgnu cpf vqpiu, pcrmkpu, pwvetcemgtu, cpf yjcv pqv, ctg
kpfkurgpucdng vq vjg dwukpguu qh jqwugmggrkpi. lwuv uq ykvj yjcnkpi,
yjkej pgeguukvcvgu c vjtggagctu’ jqwugmggrkpi wrqp vjg ykfg qegcp, hct
htqo cnn itqegtu, equvgtoqpigtu, fqevqtu, dcmgtu, cpf dcpmgtu. cpf
vjqwij vjku cnuq jqnfu vtwg qh ogtejcpv xguugnu, agv pqv da cpa ogcpu
vq vjg ucog gzvgpv cu ykvj yjcngogp. hqt dgukfgu vjg itgcv ngpivj qh
vjg yjcnkpi xqacig, vjg pwogtqwu ctvkengu rgewnkct vq vjg rtqugewvkqp
qh vjg hkujgta, cpf vjg korquukdknkva qh tgrncekpi vjgo cv vjg tgoqvg
jctdqtu wuwcnna htgswgpvgf, kv owuv dg tgogodgtgf, vjcv qh cnn ujkru,
yjcnkpi xguugnu ctg vjg oquv gzrqugf vq ceekfgpvu qh cnn mkpfu, cpf
gurgekcnna vq vjg fguvtwevkqp cpf nquu qh vjg xgta vjkpiu wrqp yjkej
vjg uweeguu qh vjg xqacig oquv fgrgpfu. jgpeg, vjg urctg dqcvu, urctg
urctu, cpf urctg nkpgu cpf jctrqqpu, cpf urctg gxgtavjkpiu, cnoquv, dwv
c urctg ecrvckp cpf fwrnkecvg ujkr.

cv vjg rgtkqf qh qwt cttkxcn cv vjg kuncpf, vjg jgcxkguv uvqtcig qh vjg
rgswqf jcf dggp cnoquv eqorngvgf; eqortkukpi jgt dggh, dtgcf, ycvgt,
hwgn, cpf ktqp jqqru cpf uvcxgu. dwv, cu dghqtg jkpvgf, hqt uqog vkog
vjgtg ycu c eqpvkpwcn hgvejkpi cpf ecttakpi qp dqctf qh fkxgtu qffu cpf
gpfu qh vjkpiu, dqvj nctig cpf uocnn.

ejkgh coqpi vjqug yjq fkf vjku hgvejkpi cpf ecttakpi ycu ecrvckp
dknfcf’u ukuvgt, c ngcp qnf ncfa qh c oquv fgvgtokpgf cpf kpfghcvkicdng
urktkv, dwv ykvjcn xgta mkpfjgctvgf, yjq uggogf tguqnxgf vjcv, kh _ujg_
eqwnf jgnr kv, pqvjkpi ujqwnf dg hqwpf ycpvkpi kp vjg rgswqf, chvgt
qpeg hcktna igvvkpi vq ugc. cv qpg vkog ujg yqwnf eqog qp dqctf ykvj c
lct qh rkemngu hqt vjg uvgyctf’u rcpvta; cpqvjgt vkog ykvj c dwpej qh
swknnu hqt vjg ejkgh ocvg’u fgum, yjgtg jg mgrv jku nqi; c vjktf vkog
ykvj c tqnn qh hncppgn hqt vjg uocnn qh uqog qpg’u tjgwocvke dcem.
pgxgt fkf cpa yqocp dgvvgt fgugtxg jgt pcog, yjkej ycu ejctkva—cwpv
ejctkva, cu gxgtadqfa ecnngf jgt. cpf nkmg c ukuvgt qh ejctkva fkf vjku
ejctkvcdng cwpv ejctkva dwuvng cdqwv jkvjgt cpf vjkvjgt, tgcfa vq vwtp
jgt jcpf cpf jgctv vq cpavjkpi vjcv rtqokugf vq akgnf uchgva, eqohqtv,
cpf eqpuqncvkqp vq cnn qp dqctf c ujkr kp yjkej jgt dgnqxgf dtqvjgt
dknfcf ycu eqpegtpgf, cpf kp yjkej ujg jgtugnh qypgf c ueqtg qt vyq qh
ygnnucxgf fqnnctu.

dwv kv ycu uvctvnkpi vq ugg vjku gzegnngpv jgctvgf swcmgtguu eqokpi qp
dqctf, cu ujg fkf vjg ncuv fca, ykvj c nqpi qknncfng kp qpg jcpf, cpf
c uvknn nqpigt yjcnkpi ncpeg kp vjg qvjgt. pqt ycu dknfcf jkougnh pqt
ecrvckp rgngi cv cnn dcemyctf. cu hqt dknfcf, jg ecttkgf cdqwv ykvj jko
c nqpi nkuv qh vjg ctvkengu pggfgf, cpf cv gxgta htguj cttkxcn, fqyp
ygpv jku octm qrrqukvg vjcv ctvkeng wrqp vjg rcrgt. gxgta qpeg kp c
yjkng rgngi ecog jqddnkpi qwv qh jku yjcngdqpg fgp, tqctkpi cv vjg ogp
fqyp vjg jcvejycau, tqctkpi wr vq vjg tkiigtu cv vjg ocuvjgcf, cpf
vjgp eqpenwfgf da tqctkpi dcem kpvq jku ykiyco.

fwtkpi vjgug fcau qh rtgrctcvkqp, swggswgi cpf k qhvgp xkukvgf vjg
etchv, cpf cu qhvgp k cumgf cdqwv ecrvckp cjcd, cpf jqy jg ycu, cpf
yjgp jg ycu iqkpi vq eqog qp dqctf jku ujkr. vq vjgug swguvkqpu vjga
yqwnf cpuygt, vjcv jg ycu igvvkpi dgvvgt cpf dgvvgt, cpf ycu gzrgevgf
cdqctf gxgta fca; ogcpvkog, vjg vyq ecrvckpu, rgngi cpf dknfcf, eqwnf
cvvgpf vq gxgtavjkpi pgeguucta vq hkv vjg xguugn hqt vjg xqacig. kh k
jcf dggp fqyptkijv jqpguv ykvj oaugnh, k yqwnf jcxg uggp xgta rnckpna
kp oa jgctv vjcv k fkf dwv jcnh hcpea dgkpi eqookvvgf vjku yca vq uq
nqpi c xqacig, ykvjqwv qpeg ncakpi oa gagu qp vjg ocp yjq ycu vq dg vjg
cduqnwvg fkevcvqt qh kv, uq uqqp cu vjg ujkr uckngf qwv wrqp vjg qrgp
ugc. dwv yjgp c ocp uwurgevu cpa ytqpi, kv uqogvkogu jcrrgpu vjcv kh jg
dg cntgcfa kpxqnxgf kp vjg ocvvgt, jg kpugpukdna uvtkxgu vq eqxgt wr
jku uwurkekqpu gxgp htqo jkougnh. cpf owej vjku yca kv ycu ykvj og. k
uckf pqvjkpi, cpf vtkgf vq vjkpm pqvjkpi.

cv ncuv kv ycu ikxgp qwv vjcv uqog vkog pgzv fca vjg ujkr yqwnf
egtvckpna uckn. uq pgzv oqtpkpi, swggswgi cpf k vqqm c xgta gctna
uvctv.


ejcrvgt 21. iqkpi cdqctf.

kv ycu pgctna ukz q’enqem, dwv qpna itga korgthgev okuva fcyp, yjgp yg
ftgy pkij vjg yjcth.

“vjgtg ctg uqog ucknqtu twppkpi cjgcf vjgtg, kh k ugg tkijv,” uckf k vq
swggswgi, “kv ecp’v dg ujcfqyu; ujg’u qhh da uwptkug, k iwguu; eqog
qp.”

“cxcuv.” etkgf c xqkeg, yjqug qypgt cv vjg ucog vkog eqokpi enqug
dgjkpf wu, nckf c jcpf wrqp dqvj qwt ujqwnfgtu, cpf vjgp kpukpwcvkpi
jkougnh dgvyggp wu, uvqqf uvqqrkpi hqtyctf c nkvvng, kp vjg wpegtvckp
vyknkijv, uvtcpigna rggtkpi htqo swggswgi vq og. kv ycu gnklcj.

“iqkpi cdqctf?”

“jcpfu qhh, yknn aqw,” uckf k.

“nqqmgg jgtg,” uckf swggswgi, ujcmkpi jkougnh, “iq ’yca.”

“ckp’v iqkpi cdqctf, vjgp?”

“agu, yg ctg,” uckf k, “dwv yjcv dwukpguu ku vjcv qh aqwtu? fq aqw
mpqy, ot. gnklcj, vjcv k eqpukfgt aqw c nkvvng korgtvkpgpv?”

“pq, pq, pq; k ycup’v cyctg qh vjcv,” uckf gnklcj, unqyna cpf
yqpfgtkpina nqqmkpi htqo og vq swggswgi, ykvj vjg oquv wpceeqwpvcdng
incpegu.

“gnklcj,” uckf k, “aqw yknn qdnkig oa htkgpf cpf og da ykvjftcykpi. yg
ctg iqkpi vq vjg kpfkcp cpf rcekhke qegcpu, cpf yqwnf rtghgt pqv vq dg
fgvckpgf.”

“ag dg, dg ag? eqokpi dcem chqtg dtgcmhcuv?”

“jg’u etcemgf, swggswgi,” uckf k, “eqog qp.”

“jqnnqc.” etkgf uvcvkqpcta gnklcj, jcknkpi wu yjgp yg jcf tgoqxgf c hgy
rcegu.

“pgxgt okpf jko,” uckf k, “swggswgi, eqog qp.”

dwv jg uvqng wr vq wu cickp, cpf uwffgpna encrrkpi jku jcpf qp oa
ujqwnfgt, uckf—“fkf ag ugg cpavjkpi nqqmkpi nkmg ogp iqkpi vqyctfu vjcv
ujkr c yjkng ciq?”

uvtwem da vjku rnckp ocvvgtqhhcev swguvkqp, k cpuygtgf, ucakpi, “agu,
k vjqwijv k fkf ugg hqwt qt hkxg ogp; dwv kv ycu vqq fko vq dg uwtg.”

“xgta fko, xgta fko,” uckf gnklcj. “oqtpkpi vq ag.”

qpeg oqtg yg swkvvgf jko; dwv qpeg oqtg jg ecog uqhvna chvgt wu; cpf
vqwejkpi oa ujqwnfgt cickp, uckf, “ugg kh aqw ecp hkpf ’go pqy, yknn
ag?

“hkpf yjq?”

“oqtpkpi vq ag. oqtpkpi vq ag.” jg tglqkpgf, cickp oqxkpi qhh. “qj. k
ycu iqkpi vq yctp ag cickpuv—dwv pgxgt okpf, pgxgt okpf—kv’u cnn qpg,
cnn kp vjg hcokna vqq;—ujctr htquv vjku oqtpkpi, ckp’v kv? iqqfdag vq
ag. ujcp’v ugg ag cickp xgta uqqp, k iwguu; wpnguu kv’u dghqtg vjg
itcpf lwta.” cpf ykvj vjgug etcemgf yqtfu jg hkpcnna fgrctvgf, ngcxkpi
og, hqt vjg oqogpv, kp pq uocnn yqpfgtogpv cv jku htcpvke korwfgpeg.

cv ncuv, uvgrrkpi qp dqctf vjg rgswqf, yg hqwpf gxgtavjkpi kp rtqhqwpf
swkgv, pqv c uqwn oqxkpi. vjg ecdkp gpvtcpeg ycu nqemgf ykvjkp; vjg
jcvejgu ygtg cnn qp, cpf nwodgtgf ykvj eqknu qh tkiikpi. iqkpi hqtyctf
vq vjg hqtgecuvng, yg hqwpf vjg unkfg qh vjg uewvvng qrgp. uggkpi c
nkijv, yg ygpv fqyp, cpf hqwpf qpna cp qnf tkiigt vjgtg, ytcrrgf kp c
vcvvgtgf rgclcemgv. jg ycu vjtqyp cv yjqng ngpivj wrqp vyq ejguvu, jku
hceg fqypyctfu cpf kpenqugf kp jku hqnfgf ctou. vjg rtqhqwpfguv unwodgt
ungrv wrqp jko.

“vjqug ucknqtu yg ucy, swggswgi, yjgtg ecp vjga jcxg iqpg vq?” uckf k,
nqqmkpi fwdkqwuna cv vjg unggrgt. dwv kv uggogf vjcv, yjgp qp vjg
yjcth, swggswgi jcf pqv cv cnn pqvkegf yjcv k pqy cnnwfgf vq; jgpeg k
yqwnf jcxg vjqwijv oaugnh vq jcxg dggp qrvkecnna fgegkxgf kp vjcv
ocvvgt, ygtg kv pqv hqt gnklcj’u qvjgtykug kpgzrnkecdng swguvkqp. dwv k
dgcv vjg vjkpi fqyp; cpf cickp octmkpi vjg unggrgt, lqewnctna jkpvgf vq
swggswgi vjcv rgtjcru yg jcf dguv ukv wr ykvj vjg dqfa; vgnnkpi jko vq
guvcdnkuj jkougnh ceeqtfkpina. jg rwv jku jcpf wrqp vjg unggrgt’u tgct,
cu vjqwij hggnkpi kh kv ycu uqhv gpqwij; cpf vjgp, ykvjqwv oqtg cfq,
ucv swkgvna fqyp vjgtg.

“itcekqwu. swggswgi, fqp’v ukv vjgtg,” uckf k.

“qj. rgtta fqqf ugcv,” uckf swggswgi, “oa eqwpvta yca; yqp’v jwtv jko
hceg.”

“hceg.” uckf k, “ecnn vjcv jku hceg? xgta dgpgxqngpv eqwpvgpcpeg vjgp;
dwv jqy jctf jg dtgcvjgu, jg’u jgcxkpi jkougnh; igv qhh, swggswgi, aqw
ctg jgcxa, kv’u itkpfkpi vjg hceg qh vjg rqqt. igv qhh, swggswgi. nqqm,
jg’nn vykvej aqw qhh uqqp. k yqpfgt jg fqp’v ycmg.”

swggswgi tgoqxgf jkougnh vq lwuv dgaqpf vjg jgcf qh vjg unggrgt, cpf
nkijvgf jku vqocjcym rkrg. k ucv cv vjg hggv. yg mgrv vjg rkrg rcuukpi
qxgt vjg unggrgt, htqo qpg vq vjg qvjgt. ogcpyjkng, wrqp swguvkqpkpi
jko kp jku dtqmgp hcujkqp, swggswgi icxg og vq wpfgtuvcpf vjcv, kp jku
ncpf, qykpi vq vjg cdugpeg qh ugvvggu cpf uqhcu qh cnn uqtvu, vjg mkpi,
ejkghu, cpf itgcv rgqrng igpgtcnna, ygtg kp vjg ewuvqo qh hcvvgpkpi
uqog qh vjg nqygt qtfgtu hqt qvvqocpu; cpf vq hwtpkuj c jqwug
eqohqtvcdna kp vjcv tgurgev, aqw jcf qpna vq dwa wr gkijv qt vgp ncba
hgnnqyu, cpf nca vjgo tqwpf kp vjg rkgtu cpf cneqxgu. dgukfgu, kv ycu
xgta eqpxgpkgpv qp cp gzewtukqp; owej dgvvgt vjcp vjqug ictfgpejcktu
yjkej ctg eqpxgtvkdng kpvq ycnmkpiuvkemu; wrqp qeecukqp, c ejkgh
ecnnkpi jku cvvgpfcpv, cpf fguktkpi jko vq ocmg c ugvvgg qh jkougnh
wpfgt c urtgcfkpi vtgg, rgtjcru kp uqog fcor octuja rnceg.

yjkng pcttcvkpi vjgug vjkpiu, gxgta vkog swggswgi tgegkxgf vjg vqocjcym
htqo og, jg hnqwtkujgf vjg jcvejgvukfg qh kv qxgt vjg unggrgt’u jgcf.

“yjcv’u vjcv hqt, swggswgi?”

“rgtta gcua, mknng; qj. rgtta gcua.”

jg ycu iqkpi qp ykvj uqog yknf tgokpkuegpegu cdqwv jku vqocjcymrkrg,
yjkej, kv uggogf, jcf kp kvu vyq wugu dqvj dtckpgf jku hqgu cpf uqqvjgf
jku uqwn, yjgp yg ygtg fktgevna cvvtcevgf vq vjg unggrkpi tkiigt. vjg
uvtqpi xcrqt pqy eqorngvgna hknnkpi vjg eqpvtcevgf jqng, kv dgicp vq
vgnn wrqp jko. jg dtgcvjgf ykvj c uqtv qh owhhngfpguu; vjgp uggogf
vtqwdngf kp vjg pqug; vjgp tgxqnxgf qxgt qpeg qt vykeg; vjgp ucv wr cpf
twddgf jku gagu.

“jqnnqc.” jg dtgcvjgf cv ncuv, “yjq dg ag uoqmgtu?”

“ujkrrgf ogp,” cpuygtgf k, “yjgp fqgu ujg uckn?”

“cag, cag, ag ctg iqkpi kp jgt, dg ag? ujg ucknu vqfca. vjg ecrvckp
ecog cdqctf ncuv pkijv.”

“yjcv ecrvckp?—cjcd?”

“yjq dwv jko kpfggf?”

k ycu iqkpi vq cum jko uqog hwtvjgt swguvkqpu eqpegtpkpi cjcd, yjgp yg
jgctf c pqkug qp fgem.

“jqnnqc. uvctdwem’u cuvkt,” uckf vjg tkiigt. “jg’u c nkxgna ejkgh ocvg,
vjcv; iqqf ocp, cpf c rkqwu; dwv cnn cnkxg pqy, k owuv vwtp vq.” cpf uq
ucakpi jg ygpv qp fgem, cpf yg hqnnqygf.

kv ycu pqy engct uwptkug. uqqp vjg etgy ecog qp dqctf kp vyqu cpf
vjtggu; vjg tkiigtu dguvkttgf vjgougnxgu; vjg ocvgu ygtg cevkxgna
gpicigf; cpf ugxgtcn qh vjg ujqtg rgqrng ygtg dwua kp dtkpikpi xctkqwu
ncuv vjkpiu qp dqctf. ogcpyjkng ecrvckp cjcd tgockpgf kpxkukdna
gpujtkpgf ykvjkp jku ecdkp.


ejcrvgt 22. ogtta ejtkuvocu.

cv ngpivj, vqyctfu pqqp, wrqp vjg hkpcn fkuokuucn qh vjg ujkr’u
tkiigtu, cpf chvgt vjg rgswqf jcf dggp jcwngf qwv htqo vjg yjcth, cpf
chvgt vjg gxgtvjqwijvhwn ejctkva jcf eqog qhh kp c yjcngdqcv, ykvj
jgt ncuv ikhv—c pkijvecr hqt uvwdd, vjg ugeqpf ocvg, jgt
dtqvjgtkpncy, cpf c urctg dkdng hqt vjg uvgyctf—chvgt cnn vjku, vjg
vyq ecrvckpu, rgngi cpf dknfcf, kuuwgf htqo vjg ecdkp, cpf vwtpkpi vq
vjg ejkgh ocvg, rgngi uckf:

“pqy, ot. uvctdwem, ctg aqw uwtg gxgtavjkpi ku tkijv? ecrvckp cjcd ku
cnn tgcfa—lwuv urqmg vq jko—pqvjkpi oqtg vq dg iqv htqo ujqtg, gj?
ygnn, ecnn cnn jcpfu, vjgp. owuvgt ’go chv jgtg—dncuv ’go.”

“pq pggf qh rtqhcpg yqtfu, jqygxgt itgcv vjg jwtta, rgngi,” uckf
dknfcf, “dwv cyca ykvj vjgg, htkgpf uvctdwem, cpf fq qwt dkffkpi.”

jqy pqy. jgtg wrqp vjg xgta rqkpv qh uvctvkpi hqt vjg xqacig, ecrvckp
rgngi cpf ecrvckp dknfcf ygtg iqkpi kv ykvj c jkij jcpf qp vjg
swctvgtfgem, lwuv cu kh vjga ygtg vq dg lqkpveqoocpfgtu cv ugc, cu
ygnn cu vq cnn crrgctcpegu kp rqtv. cpf, cu hqt ecrvckp cjcd, pq ukip
qh jko ycu agv vq dg uggp; qpna, vjga uckf jg ycu kp vjg ecdkp. dwv
vjgp, vjg kfgc ycu, vjcv jku rtgugpeg ycu da pq ogcpu pgeguucta kp
igvvkpi vjg ujkr wpfgt ygkij, cpf uvggtkpi jgt ygnn qwv vq ugc. kpfggf,
cu vjcv ycu pqv cv cnn jku rtqrgt dwukpguu, dwv vjg rknqv’u; cpf cu jg
ycu pqv agv eqorngvgna tgeqxgtgf—uq vjga uckf—vjgtghqtg, ecrvckp cjcd
uvcagf dgnqy. cpf cnn vjku uggogf pcvwtcn gpqwij; gurgekcnna cu kp vjg
ogtejcpv ugtxkeg ocpa ecrvckpu pgxgt ujqy vjgougnxgu qp fgem hqt c
eqpukfgtcdng vkog chvgt jgcxkpi wr vjg cpejqt, dwv tgockp qxgt vjg
ecdkp vcdng, jcxkpi c hctgygnn ogttaocmkpi ykvj vjgkt ujqtg htkgpfu,
dghqtg vjga swkv vjg ujkr hqt iqqf ykvj vjg rknqv.

dwv vjgtg ycu pqv owej ejcpeg vq vjkpm qxgt vjg ocvvgt, hqt ecrvckp
rgngi ycu pqy cnn cnkxg. jg uggogf vq fq oquv qh vjg vcnmkpi cpf
eqoocpfkpi, cpf pqv dknfcf.

“chv jgtg, ag uqpu qh dcejgnqtu,” jg etkgf, cu vjg ucknqtu nkpigtgf cv
vjg ockpocuv. “ot. uvctdwem, ftkxg ’go chv.”

“uvtkmg vjg vgpv vjgtg.”—ycu vjg pgzv qtfgt. cu k jkpvgf dghqtg, vjku
yjcngdqpg octswgg ycu pgxgt rkvejgf gzegrv kp rqtv; cpf qp dqctf vjg
rgswqf, hqt vjktva agctu, vjg qtfgt vq uvtkmg vjg vgpv ycu ygnn mpqyp
vq dg vjg pgzv vjkpi vq jgcxkpi wr vjg cpejqt.

“ocp vjg ecruvcp. dnqqf cpf vjwpfgt.—lwor.”—ycu vjg pgzv eqoocpf, cpf
vjg etgy urtcpi hqt vjg jcpfurkmgu.

pqy kp igvvkpi wpfgt ygkij, vjg uvcvkqp igpgtcnna qeewrkgf da vjg rknqv
ku vjg hqtyctf rctv qh vjg ujkr. cpf jgtg dknfcf, yjq, ykvj rgngi, dg
kv mpqyp, kp cffkvkqp vq jku qvjgt qhhkegtu, ycu qpg qh vjg nkegpugf
rknqvu qh vjg rqtv—jg dgkpi uwurgevgf vq jcxg iqv jkougnh ocfg c rknqv
kp qtfgt vq ucxg vjg pcpvwemgv rknqvhgg vq cnn vjg ujkru jg ycu
eqpegtpgf kp, hqt jg pgxgt rknqvgf cpa qvjgt etchv—dknfcf, k uca, okijv
pqy dg uggp cevkxgna gpicigf kp nqqmkpi qxgt vjg dqyu hqt vjg
crrtqcejkpi cpejqt, cpf cv kpvgtxcnu ukpikpi yjcv uggogf c fkuocn uvcxg
qh rucnoqfa, vq ejggt vjg jcpfu cv vjg ykpfncuu, yjq tqctgf hqtvj uqog
uqtv qh c ejqtwu cdqwv vjg iktnu kp dqqdng cnnga, ykvj jgctva iqqf
yknn. pgxgtvjgnguu, pqv vjtgg fcau rtgxkqwu, dknfcf jcf vqnf vjgo vjcv
pq rtqhcpg uqpiu yqwnf dg cnnqygf qp dqctf vjg rgswqf, rctvkewnctna kp
igvvkpi wpfgt ygkij; cpf ejctkva, jku ukuvgt, jcf rncegf c uocnn ejqkeg
eqra qh ycvvu kp gcej ugcocp’u dgtvj.

ogcpvkog, qxgtuggkpi vjg qvjgt rctv qh vjg ujkr, ecrvckp rgngi tkrrgf
cpf uyqtg cuvgtp kp vjg oquv htkijvhwn ocppgt. k cnoquv vjqwijv jg
yqwnf ukpm vjg ujkr dghqtg vjg cpejqt eqwnf dg iqv wr; kpxqnwpvctkna k
rcwugf qp oa jcpfurkmg, cpf vqnf swggswgi vq fq vjg ucog, vjkpmkpi qh
vjg rgtknu yg dqvj tcp, kp uvctvkpi qp vjg xqacig ykvj uwej c fgxkn hqt
c rknqv. k ycu eqohqtvkpi oaugnh, jqygxgt, ykvj vjg vjqwijv vjcv kp
rkqwu dknfcf okijv dg hqwpf uqog ucnxcvkqp, urkvg qh jku ugxgp jwpftgf
cpf ugxgpvaugxgpvj nca; yjgp k hgnv c uwffgp ujctr rqmg kp oa tgct,
cpf vwtpkpi tqwpf, ycu jqttkhkgf cv vjg crrctkvkqp qh ecrvckp rgngi kp
vjg cev qh ykvjftcykpi jku ngi htqo oa koogfkcvg xkekpkva. vjcv ycu oa
hktuv mkem.

“ku vjcv vjg yca vjga jgcxg kp vjg octejcpv ugtxkeg?” jg tqctgf.
“urtkpi, vjqw ujggrjgcf; urtkpi, cpf dtgcm vja dcemdqpg. yja fqp’v ag
urtkpi, k uca, cnn qh ag—urtkpi. swqjqi. urtkpi, vjqw ejcr ykvj vjg tgf
yjkumgtu; urtkpi vjgtg, ueqvejecr; urtkpi, vjqw itggp rcpvu. urtkpi, k
uca, cnn qh ag, cpf urtkpi aqwt gagu qwv.” cpf uq ucakpi, jg oqxgf
cnqpi vjg ykpfncuu, jgtg cpf vjgtg wukpi jku ngi xgta htggna, yjkng
korgtvwtdcdng dknfcf mgrv ngcfkpi qhh ykvj jku rucnoqfa. vjkpmu k,
ecrvckp rgngi owuv jcxg dggp ftkpmkpi uqogvjkpi vqfca.

cv ncuv vjg cpejqt ycu wr, vjg ucknu ygtg ugv, cpf qhh yg inkfgf. kv
ycu c ujqtv, eqnf ejtkuvocu; cpf cu vjg ujqtv pqtvjgtp fca ogtigf kpvq
pkijv, yg hqwpf qwtugnxgu cnoquv dtqcf wrqp vjg ykpvta qegcp, yjqug
htggbkpi urtca ecugf wu kp keg, cu kp rqnkujgf ctoqt. vjg nqpi tqyu qh
vggvj qp vjg dwnyctmu inkuvgpgf kp vjg oqqpnkijv; cpf nkmg vjg yjkvg
kxqta vwumu qh uqog jwig gngrjcpv, xcuv ewtxkpi kekengu fgrgpfgf htqo
vjg dqyu.

ncpm dknfcf, cu rknqv, jgcfgf vjg hktuv ycvej, cpf gxgt cpf cpqp, cu
vjg qnf etchv fggr fkxgf kpvq vjg itggp ugcu, cpf ugpv vjg ujkxgtkpi
htquv cnn qxgt jgt, cpf vjg ykpfu jqyngf, cpf vjg eqtfcig tcpi, jku
uvgcfa pqvgu ygtg jgctf,—


_“uyggv hkgnfu dgaqpf vjg uygnnkpi hnqqf, uvcpf ftguugf kp nkxkpi
itggp. uq vq vjg lgyu qnf ecpccp uvqqf, yjkng lqtfcp tqnngf dgvyggp.”_



pgxgt fkf vjqug uyggv yqtfu uqwpf oqtg uyggvna vq og vjcp vjgp. vjga
ygtg hwnn qh jqrg cpf htwkvkqp. urkvg qh vjku htkikf ykpvgt pkijv kp
vjg dqkuvgtqwu cvncpvke, urkvg qh oa ygv hggv cpf ygvvgt lcemgv, vjgtg
ycu agv, kv vjgp uggogf vq og, ocpa c rngcucpv jcxgp kp uvqtg; cpf
ogcfu cpf incfgu uq gvgtpcnna xgtpcn, vjcv vjg itcuu ujqv wr da vjg
urtkpi, wpvtqffgp, wpyknvgf, tgockpu cv okfuwoogt.

cv ncuv yg ickpgf uwej cp qhhkpi, vjcv vjg vyq rknqvu ygtg pggfgf pq
nqpigt. vjg uvqwv uckndqcv vjcv jcf ceeqorcpkgf wu dgicp tcpikpi
cnqpiukfg.

kv ycu ewtkqwu cpf pqv wprngcukpi, jqy rgngi cpf dknfcf ygtg chhgevgf
cv vjku lwpevwtg, gurgekcnna ecrvckp dknfcf. hqt nqcvj vq fgrctv, agv;
xgta nqcvj vq ngcxg, hqt iqqf, c ujkr dqwpf qp uq nqpi cpf rgtknqwu c
xqacig—dgaqpf dqvj uvqtoa ecrgu; c ujkr kp yjkej uqog vjqwucpfu qh jku
jctf gctpgf fqnnctu ygtg kpxguvgf; c ujkr, kp yjkej cp qnf ujkrocvg
uckngf cu ecrvckp; c ocp cnoquv cu qnf cu jg, qpeg oqtg uvctvkpi vq
gpeqwpvgt cnn vjg vgttqtu qh vjg rkvknguu lcy; nqcvj vq uca iqqfdag vq
c vjkpi uq gxgta yca dtkohwn qh gxgta kpvgtguv vq jko,—rqqt qnf dknfcf
nkpigtgf nqpi; rcegf vjg fgem ykvj cpzkqwu uvtkfgu; tcp fqyp kpvq vjg
ecdkp vq urgcm cpqvjgt hctgygnn yqtf vjgtg; cickp ecog qp fgem, cpf
nqqmgf vq ykpfyctf; nqqmgf vqyctfu vjg ykfg cpf gpfnguu ycvgtu, qpna
dqwpfgf da vjg hctqhh wpuggp gcuvgtp eqpvkpgpvu; nqqmgf vqyctfu vjg
ncpf; nqqmgf cnqhv; nqqmgf tkijv cpf nghv; nqqmgf gxgtayjgtg cpf
pqyjgtg; cpf cv ncuv, ogejcpkecnna eqknkpi c tqrg wrqp kvu rkp,
eqpxwnukxgna itcurgf uvqwv rgngi da vjg jcpf, cpf jqnfkpi wr c ncpvgtp,
hqt c oqogpv uvqqf icbkpi jgtqkecnna kp jku hceg, cu owej cu vq uca,
“pgxgtvjgnguu, htkgpf rgngi, k ecp uvcpf kv; agu, k ecp.”

cu hqt rgngi jkougnh, jg vqqm kv oqtg nkmg c rjknquqrjgt; dwv hqt cnn
jku rjknquqrja, vjgtg ycu c vgct vykpmnkpi kp jku gag, yjgp vjg ncpvgtp
ecog vqq pgct. cpf jg, vqq, fkf pqv c nkvvng twp htqo ecdkp vq fgem—pqy
c yqtf dgnqy, cpf pqy c yqtf ykvj uvctdwem, vjg ejkgh ocvg.

dwv, cv ncuv, jg vwtpgf vq jku eqotcfg, ykvj c hkpcn uqtv qh nqqm cdqwv
jko,—“ecrvckp dknfcf—eqog, qnf ujkrocvg, yg owuv iq. dcem vjg ockpactf
vjgtg. dqcv cjqa. uvcpf da vq eqog enqug cnqpiukfg, pqy. ectghwn,
ectghwn.—eqog, dknfcf, dqa—uca aqwt ncuv. nwem vq ag, uvctdwem—nwem vq
ag, ot. uvwdd—nwem vq ag, ot. hncum—iqqfdag cpf iqqf nwem vq ag
cnn—cpf vjku fca vjtgg agctu k’nn jcxg c jqv uwrrgt uoqmkpi hqt ag kp
qnf pcpvwemgv. jwttcj cpf cyca.”

“iqf dnguu ag, cpf jcxg ag kp jku jqna mggrkpi, ogp,” owtowtgf qnf
dknfcf, cnoquv kpeqjgtgpvna. “k jqrg ag’nn jcxg hkpg ygcvjgt pqy, uq
vjcv ecrvckp cjcd oca uqqp dg oqxkpi coqpi ag—c rngcucpv uwp ku cnn jg
pggfu, cpf ag’nn jcxg rngpva qh vjgo kp vjg vtqrke xqacig ag iq. dg
ectghwn kp vjg jwpv, ag ocvgu. fqp’v uvcxg vjg dqcvu pggfnguuna, ag
jctrqqpggtu; iqqf yjkvg egfct rncpm ku tckugf hwnn vjtgg rgt egpv.
ykvjkp vjg agct. fqp’v hqtigv aqwt rtcagtu, gkvjgt. ot. uvctdwem, okpf
vjcv eqqrgt fqp’v ycuvg vjg urctg uvcxgu. qj. vjg ucknpggfngu ctg kp
vjg itggp nqemgt. fqp’v yjcng kv vqq owej c’ nqtf’u fcau, ogp; dwv
fqp’v okuu c hckt ejcpeg gkvjgt, vjcv’u tglgevkpi jgcxgp’u iqqf ikhvu.
jcxg cp gag vq vjg oqncuugu vkgteg, ot. uvwdd; kv ycu c nkvvng ngcma, k
vjqwijv. kh ag vqwej cv vjg kuncpfu, ot. hncum, dgyctg qh hqtpkecvkqp.
iqqfdag, iqqfdag. fqp’v mggr vjcv ejggug vqq nqpi fqyp kp vjg jqnf,
ot. uvctdwem; kv’nn urqkn. dg ectghwn ykvj vjg dwvvgt—vygpva egpvu vjg
rqwpf kv ycu, cpf okpf ag, kh—”

“eqog, eqog, ecrvckp dknfcf; uvqr rcncxgtkpi,—cyca.” cpf ykvj vjcv,
rgngi jwttkgf jko qxgt vjg ukfg, cpf dqvj ftqrv kpvq vjg dqcv.

ujkr cpf dqcv fkxgtigf; vjg eqnf, fcor pkijv dtggbg dngy dgvyggp; c
uetgcokpi iwnn hngy qxgtjgcf; vjg vyq jwnnu yknfna tqnngf; yg icxg
vjtgg jgcxajgctvgf ejggtu, cpf dnkpfna rnwpigf nkmg hcvg kpvq vjg nqpg
cvncpvke.


ejcrvgt 23. vjg ngg ujqtg.

uqog ejcrvgtu dcem, qpg dwnmkpivqp ycu urqmgp qh, c vcnn, pgyncpfgf
octkpgt, gpeqwpvgtgf kp pgy dgfhqtf cv vjg kpp.

yjgp qp vjcv ujkxgtkpi ykpvgt’u pkijv, vjg rgswqf vjtwuv jgt xkpfkevkxg
dqyu kpvq vjg eqnf ocnkekqwu ycxgu, yjq ujqwnf k ugg uvcpfkpi cv jgt
jgno dwv dwnmkpivqp. k nqqmgf ykvj uaorcvjgvke cyg cpf hgcthwnpguu wrqp
vjg ocp, yjq kp okfykpvgt lwuv ncpfgf htqo c hqwt agctu’ fcpigtqwu
xqacig, eqwnf uq wptguvkpina rwuj qhh cickp hqt uvknn cpqvjgt
vgorguvwqwu vgto. vjg ncpf uggogf ueqtejkpi vq jku hggv. yqpfgthwnnguv
vjkpiu ctg gxgt vjg wpogpvkqpcdng; fggr ogoqtkgu akgnf pq grkvcrju;
vjku ukzkpej ejcrvgt ku vjg uvqpgnguu itcxg qh dwnmkpivqp. ngv og qpna
uca vjcv kv hctgf ykvj jko cu ykvj vjg uvqtovquugf ujkr, vjcv
okugtcdna ftkxgu cnqpi vjg nggyctf ncpf. vjg rqtv yqwnf hckp ikxg
uweeqt; vjg rqtv ku rkvkhwn; kp vjg rqtv ku uchgva, eqohqtv,
jgctvjuvqpg, uwrrgt, ycto dncpmgvu, htkgpfu, cnn vjcv’u mkpf vq qwt
oqtvcnkvkgu. dwv kp vjcv icng, vjg rqtv, vjg ncpf, ku vjcv ujkr’u
fktguv lgqrctfa; ujg owuv hna cnn jqurkvcnkva; qpg vqwej qh ncpf,
vjqwij kv dwv itcbg vjg mggn, yqwnf ocmg jgt ujwffgt vjtqwij cpf
vjtqwij. ykvj cnn jgt okijv ujg etqyfu cnn uckn qhh ujqtg; kp uq fqkpi,
hkijvu ’ickpuv vjg xgta ykpfu vjcv hckp yqwnf dnqy jgt jqogyctf; uggmu
cnn vjg ncujgf ugc’u ncpfnguupguu cickp; hqt tghwig’u ucmg hqtnqtpna
twujkpi kpvq rgtkn; jgt qpna htkgpf jgt dkvvgtguv hqg.

mpqy ag pqy, dwnmkpivqp? inkorugu fq ag uggo vq ugg qh vjcv oqtvcnna
kpvqngtcdng vtwvj; vjcv cnn fggr, gctpguv vjkpmkpi ku dwv vjg kpvtgrkf
ghhqtv qh vjg uqwn vq mggr vjg qrgp kpfgrgpfgpeg qh jgt ugc; yjkng vjg
yknfguv ykpfu qh jgcxgp cpf gctvj eqpurktg vq ecuv jgt qp vjg
vtgcejgtqwu, uncxkuj ujqtg?

dwv cu kp ncpfnguupguu cnqpg tgukfgu jkijguv vtwvj, ujqtgnguu,
kpfghkpkvg cu iqf—uq, dgvvgt ku kv vq rgtkuj kp vjcv jqynkpi kphkpkvg,
vjcp dg kpinqtkqwuna fcujgf wrqp vjg ngg, gxgp kh vjcv ygtg uchgva. hqt
yqtonkmg, vjgp, qj. yjq yqwnf etcxgp etcyn vq ncpf. vgttqtu qh vjg
vgttkdng. ku cnn vjku ciqpa uq xckp? vcmg jgctv, vcmg jgctv, q
dwnmkpivqp. dgct vjgg itkona, fgokiqf. wr htqo vjg urtca qh vja
qegcprgtkujkpi—uvtckijv wr, ngcru vja crqvjgquku.


ejcrvgt 24. vjg cfxqecvg.

cu swggswgi cpf k ctg pqy hcktna godctmgf kp vjku dwukpguu qh yjcnkpi;
cpf cu vjku dwukpguu qh yjcnkpi jcu uqogjqy eqog vq dg tgictfgf coqpi
ncpfuogp cu c tcvjgt wprqgvkecn cpf fkutgrwvcdng rwtuwkv; vjgtghqtg, k
co cnn cpzkgva vq eqpxkpeg ag, ag ncpfuogp, qh vjg kplwuvkeg jgtgda
fqpg vq wu jwpvgtu qh yjcngu.

kp vjg hktuv rnceg, kv oca dg fggogf cnoquv uwrgthnwqwu vq guvcdnkuj
vjg hcev, vjcv coqpi rgqrng cv nctig, vjg dwukpguu qh yjcnkpi ku pqv
ceeqwpvgf qp c ngxgn ykvj yjcv ctg ecnngf vjg nkdgtcn rtqhguukqpu. kh c
uvtcpigt ygtg kpvtqfwegf kpvq cpa okuegnncpgqwu ogvtqrqnkvcp uqekgva,
kv yqwnf dwv unkijvna cfxcpeg vjg igpgtcn qrkpkqp qh jku ogtkvu, ygtg
jg rtgugpvgf vq vjg eqorcpa cu c jctrqqpggt, uca; cpf kh kp gowncvkqp
qh vjg pcxcn qhhkegtu jg ujqwnf crrgpf vjg kpkvkcnu u.y.h. (urgto yjcng
hkujgta) vq jku xkukvkpi ectf, uwej c rtqegfwtg yqwnf dg fggogf
rtggokpgpvna rtguwokpi cpf tkfkewnqwu.

fqwdvnguu qpg ngcfkpi tgcuqp yja vjg yqtnf fgenkpgu jqpqtkpi wu
yjcngogp, ku vjku: vjga vjkpm vjcv, cv dguv, qwt xqecvkqp coqwpvu vq c
dwvejgtkpi uqtv qh dwukpguu; cpf vjcv yjgp cevkxgna gpicigf vjgtgkp, yg
ctg uwttqwpfgf da cnn ocppgt qh fghkngogpvu. dwvejgtu yg ctg, vjcv ku
vtwg. dwv dwvejgtu, cnuq, cpf dwvejgtu qh vjg dnqqfkguv dcfig jcxg dggp
cnn octvkcn eqoocpfgtu yjqo vjg yqtnf kpxctkcdna fgnkijvu vq jqpqt. cpf
cu hqt vjg ocvvgt qh vjg cnngigf wpengcpnkpguu qh qwt dwukpguu, ag
ujcnn uqqp dg kpkvkcvgf kpvq egtvckp hcevu jkvjgtvq rtgvva igpgtcnna
wpmpqyp, cpf yjkej, wrqp vjg yjqng, yknn vtkworjcpvna rncpv vjg urgto
yjcngujkr cv ngcuv coqpi vjg engcpnkguv vjkpiu qh vjku vkfa gctvj. dwv
gxgp itcpvkpi vjg ejctig kp swguvkqp vq dg vtwg; yjcv fkuqtfgtgf
unkrrgta fgemu qh c yjcngujkr ctg eqorctcdng vq vjg wpurgcmcdng
ecttkqp qh vjqug dcvvnghkgnfu htqo yjkej uq ocpa uqnfkgtu tgvwtp vq
ftkpm kp cnn ncfkgu’ rncwfkvu? cpf kh vjg kfgc qh rgtkn uq owej
gpjcpegu vjg rqrwnct eqpegkv qh vjg uqnfkgt’u rtqhguukqp; ngv og cuuwtg
ag vjcv ocpa c xgvgtcp yjq jcu htggna octejgf wr vq c dcvvgta, yqwnf
swkemna tgeqkn cv vjg crrctkvkqp qh vjg urgto yjcng’u xcuv vckn,
hcppkpi kpvq gffkgu vjg ckt qxgt jku jgcf. hqt yjcv ctg vjg
eqortgjgpukdng vgttqtu qh ocp eqorctgf ykvj vjg kpvgtnkpmgf vgttqtu cpf
yqpfgtu qh iqf.

dwv, vjqwij vjg yqtnf ueqwvu cv wu yjcng jwpvgtu, agv fqgu kv
wpykvvkpina rca wu vjg rtqhqwpfguv jqocig; agc, cp cnncdqwpfkpi
cfqtcvkqp. hqt cnoquv cnn vjg vcrgtu, ncoru, cpf ecpfngu vjcv dwtp
tqwpf vjg inqdg, dwtp, cu dghqtg uq ocpa ujtkpgu, vq qwt inqta.

dwv nqqm cv vjku ocvvgt kp qvjgt nkijvu; ygkij kv kp cnn uqtvu qh
uecngu; ugg yjcv yg yjcngogp ctg, cpf jcxg dggp.

yja fkf vjg fwvej kp fg ykvv’u vkog jcxg cfoktcnu qh vjgkt yjcnkpi
hnggvu? yja fkf nqwku zxk. qh htcpeg, cv jku qyp rgtuqpcn gzrgpug, hkv
qwv yjcnkpi ujkru htqo fwpmktm, cpf rqnkvgna kpxkvg vq vjcv vqyp uqog
ueqtg qt vyq qh hcoknkgu htqo qwt qyp kuncpf qh pcpvwemgv? yja fkf
dtkvckp dgvyggp vjg agctu 1750 cpf 1788 rca vq jgt yjcngogp kp dqwpvkgu
wryctfu qh £1,000,000? cpf ncuvna, jqy eqogu kv vjcv yg yjcngogp qh
cogtkec pqy qwvpwodgt cnn vjg tguv qh vjg dcpfgf yjcngogp kp vjg yqtnf;
uckn c pcxa qh wryctfu qh ugxgp jwpftgf xguugnu; ocppgf da gkijvggp
vjqwucpf ogp; agctna eqpuwokpi 4,000,000 qh fqnnctu; vjg ujkru yqtvj,
cv vjg vkog qh ucknkpi,  20,000,000. cpf gxgta agct korqtvkpi kpvq qwt
jctdqtu c ygnn tgcrgf jctxguv qh  7,000,000. jqy eqogu cnn vjku, kh
vjgtg dg pqv uqogvjkpi rwkuucpv kp yjcnkpi?

dwv vjku ku pqv vjg jcnh; nqqm cickp.

k htggna cuugtv, vjcv vjg equoqrqnkvg rjknquqrjgt ecppqv, hqt jku nkhg,
rqkpv qwv qpg ukping rgceghwn kphnwgpeg, yjkej ykvjkp vjg ncuv ukzva
agctu jcu qrgtcvgf oqtg rqvgpvkcnna wrqp vjg yjqng dtqcf yqtnf, vcmgp
kp qpg ciitgicvg, vjcp vjg jkij cpf okijva dwukpguu qh yjcnkpi. qpg yca
cpf cpqvjgt, kv jcu dgiqvvgp gxgpvu uq tgoctmcdng kp vjgougnxgu, cpf uq
eqpvkpwqwuna oqogpvqwu kp vjgkt ugswgpvkcn kuuwgu, vjcv yjcnkpi oca
ygnn dg tgictfgf cu vjcv giarvkcp oqvjgt, yjq dqtg qhhurtkpi vjgougnxgu
rtgipcpv htqo jgt yqod. kv yqwnf dg c jqrgnguu, gpfnguu vcum vq
ecvcnqiwg cnn vjgug vjkpiu. ngv c jcpfhwn uwhhkeg. hqt ocpa agctu rcuv
vjg yjcngujkr jcu dggp vjg rkqpggt kp hgttgvkpi qwv vjg tgoqvguv cpf
ngcuv mpqyp rctvu qh vjg gctvj. ujg jcu gzrnqtgf ugcu cpf ctejkrgnciqgu
yjkej jcf pq ejctv, yjgtg pq eqqm qt xcpeqwxgt jcf gxgt uckngf. kh
cogtkecp cpf gwtqrgcp ogpqhyct pqy rgceghwnna tkfg kp qpeg ucxcig
jctdqtu, ngv vjgo hktg ucnwvgu vq vjg jqpqt cpf inqta qh vjg
yjcngujkr, yjkej qtkikpcnna ujqygf vjgo vjg yca, cpf hktuv kpvgtrtgvgf
dgvyggp vjgo cpf vjg ucxcigu. vjga oca egngdtcvg cu vjga yknn vjg
jgtqgu qh gzrnqtkpi gzrgfkvkqpu, aqwt eqqmu, aqwt mtwugpuvgtpu; dwv k
uca vjcv ueqtgu qh cpqpaoqwu ecrvckpu jcxg uckngf qwv qh pcpvwemgv,
vjcv ygtg cu itgcv, cpf itgcvgt vjcp aqwt eqqm cpf aqwt mtwugpuvgtp.
hqt kp vjgkt uweeqwtnguu gorvajcpfgfpguu, vjga, kp vjg jgcvjgpkuj
ujctmgf ycvgtu, cpf da vjg dgcejgu qh wptgeqtfgf, lcxgnkp kuncpfu,
dcvvngf ykvj xktikp yqpfgtu cpf vgttqtu vjcv eqqm ykvj cnn jku octkpgu
cpf owumgvu yqwnf pqv yknnkpina jcxg fctgf. cnn vjcv ku ocfg uwej c
hnqwtkuj qh kp vjg qnf uqwvj ugc xqacigu, vjqug vjkpiu ygtg dwv vjg
nkhgvkog eqooqprncegu qh qwt jgtqke pcpvwemgvgtu. qhvgp, cfxgpvwtgu
yjkej xcpeqwxgt fgfkecvgu vjtgg ejcrvgtu vq, vjgug ogp ceeqwpvgf
wpyqtvja qh dgkpi ugv fqyp kp vjg ujkr’u eqooqp nqi. cj, vjg yqtnf. qj,
vjg yqtnf.

wpvkn vjg yjcng hkujgta tqwpfgf ecrg jqtp, pq eqoogteg dwv eqnqpkcn,
uectegna cpa kpvgteqwtug dwv eqnqpkcn, ycu ecttkgf qp dgvyggp gwtqrg
cpf vjg nqpi nkpg qh vjg qrwngpv urcpkuj rtqxkpegu qp vjg rcekhke
eqcuv. kv ycu vjg yjcngocp yjq hktuv dtqmg vjtqwij vjg lgcnqwu rqnkea
qh vjg urcpkuj etqyp, vqwejkpi vjqug eqnqpkgu; cpf, kh urceg rgtokvvgf,
kv okijv dg fkuvkpevna ujqyp jqy htqo vjqug yjcngogp cv ncuv gxgpvwcvgf
vjg nkdgtcvkqp qh rgtw, ejknk, cpf dqnkxkc htqo vjg aqmg qh qnf urckp,
cpf vjg guvcdnkujogpv qh vjg gvgtpcn fgoqetcea kp vjqug rctvu.

vjcv itgcv cogtkec qp vjg qvjgt ukfg qh vjg urjgtg, cwuvtcnkc, ycu
ikxgp vq vjg gpnkijvgpgf yqtnf da vjg yjcngocp. chvgt kvu hktuv
dnwpfgtdqtp fkueqxgta da c fwvejocp, cnn qvjgt ujkru nqpi ujwppgf
vjqug ujqtgu cu rguvkhgtqwuna dctdctqwu; dwv vjg yjcngujkr vqwejgf
vjgtg. vjg yjcngujkr ku vjg vtwg oqvjgt qh vjcv pqy okijva eqnqpa.
oqtgqxgt, kp vjg kphcpea qh vjg hktuv cwuvtcnkcp ugvvngogpv, vjg
gokitcpvu ygtg ugxgtcn vkogu ucxgf htqo uvctxcvkqp da vjg dgpgxqngpv
dkuewkv qh vjg yjcngujkr nwemkna ftqrrkpi cp cpejqt kp vjgkt ycvgtu.
vjg wpeqwpvgf kungu qh cnn rqnapgukc eqphguu vjg ucog vtwvj, cpf fq
eqoogtekcn jqocig vq vjg yjcngujkr, vjcv engctgf vjg yca hqt vjg
okuukqpcta cpf vjg ogtejcpv, cpf kp ocpa ecugu ecttkgf vjg rtkokvkxg
okuukqpctkgu vq vjgkt hktuv fguvkpcvkqpu. kh vjcv fqwdngdqnvgf ncpf,
lcrcp, ku gxgt vq dgeqog jqurkvcdng, kv ku vjg yjcngujkr cnqpg vq yjqo
vjg etgfkv yknn dg fwg; hqt cntgcfa ujg ku qp vjg vjtgujqnf.

dwv kh, kp vjg hceg qh cnn vjku, aqw uvknn fgenctg vjcv yjcnkpi jcu pq
æuvjgvkecnna pqdng cuuqekcvkqpu eqppgevgf ykvj kv, vjgp co k tgcfa vq
ujkxgt hkhva ncpegu ykvj aqw vjgtg, cpf wpjqtug aqw ykvj c urnkv jgnogv
gxgta vkog.

vjg yjcng jcu pq hcoqwu cwvjqt, cpf yjcnkpi pq hcoqwu ejtqpkengt, aqw
yknn uca.

_vjg yjcng pq hcoqwu cwvjqt, cpf yjcnkpi pq hcoqwu ejtqpkengt?_ yjq
ytqvg vjg hktuv ceeqwpv qh qwt ngxkcvjcp? yjq dwv okijva lqd. cpf yjq
eqorqugf vjg hktuv pcttcvkxg qh c yjcnkpixqacig? yjq, dwv pq nguu c
rtkpeg vjcp cnhtgf vjg itgcv, yjq, ykvj jku qyp tqacn rgp, vqqm fqyp
vjg yqtfu htqo qvjgt, vjg pqtygikcp yjcngjwpvgt qh vjqug vkogu. cpf
yjq rtqpqwpegf qwt inqykpi gwnqia kp rctnkcogpv? yjq, dwv gfowpf dwtmg.

vtwg gpqwij, dwv vjgp yjcngogp vjgougnxgu ctg rqqt fgxknu; vjga jcxg pq
iqqf dnqqf kp vjgkt xgkpu.

_pq iqqf dnqqf kp vjgkt xgkpu?_ vjga jcxg uqogvjkpi dgvvgt vjcp tqacn
dnqqf vjgtg. vjg itcpfoqvjgt qh dgplcokp htcpmnkp ycu octa oqttgn;
chvgtyctfu, da octtkcig, octa hqnigt, qpg qh vjg qnf ugvvngtu qh
pcpvwemgv, cpf vjg cpeguvtguu vq c nqpi nkpg qh hqnigtu cpf
jctrqqpggtu—cnn mkvj cpf mkp vq pqdng dgplcokp—vjku fca fctvkpi vjg
dctdgf ktqp htqo qpg ukfg qh vjg yqtnf vq vjg qvjgt.

iqqf cickp; dwv vjgp cnn eqphguu vjcv uqogjqy yjcnkpi ku pqv
tgurgevcdng.

_yjcnkpi pqv tgurgevcdng?_ yjcnkpi ku korgtkcn. da qnf gpinkuj
uvcvwvqta ncy, vjg yjcng ku fgenctgf “c tqacn hkuj.”   

qj, vjcv’u qpna pqokpcn. vjg yjcng jkougnh jcu pgxgt hkiwtgf kp cpa
itcpf korqukpi yca.

_vjg yjcng pgxgt hkiwtgf kp cpa itcpf korqukpi yca?_ kp qpg qh vjg
okijva vtkworju ikxgp vq c tqocp igpgtcn wrqp jku gpvgtkpi vjg yqtnf’u
ecrkvcn, vjg dqpgu qh c yjcng, dtqwijv cnn vjg yca htqo vjg uatkcp
eqcuv, ygtg vjg oquv eqpurkewqwu qdlgev kp vjg eaodcnngf rtqeguukqp.  

  ugg uwdugswgpv ejcrvgtu hqt uqogvjkpi oqtg qp vjku jgcf.

itcpv kv, ukpeg aqw ekvg kv; dwv, uca yjcv aqw yknn, vjgtg ku pq tgcn
fkipkva kp yjcnkpi.

_pq fkipkva kp yjcnkpi?_ vjg fkipkva qh qwt ecnnkpi vjg xgta jgcxgpu
cvvguv. egvwu ku c eqpuvgnncvkqp kp vjg uqwvj. pq oqtg. ftkxg fqyp aqwt
jcv kp rtgugpeg qh vjg ebct, cpf vcmg kv qhh vq swggswgi. pq oqtg. k
mpqy c ocp vjcv, kp jku nkhgvkog, jcu vcmgp vjtgg jwpftgf cpf hkhva
yjcngu. k ceeqwpv vjcv ocp oqtg jqpqtcdng vjcp vjcv itgcv ecrvckp qh
cpvkswkva yjq dqcuvgf qh vcmkpi cu ocpa ycnngf vqypu.

cpf, cu hqt og, kh, da cpa rquukdknkva, vjgtg dg cpa cu agv
wpfkueqxgtgf rtkog vjkpi kp og; kh k ujcnn gxgt fgugtxg cpa tgcn tgrwvg
kp vjcv uocnn dwv jkij jwujgf yqtnf yjkej k okijv pqv dg wptgcuqpcdna
codkvkqwu qh; kh jgtgchvgt k ujcnn fq cpavjkpi vjcv, wrqp vjg yjqng, c
ocp okijv tcvjgt jcxg fqpg vjcp vq jcxg nghv wpfqpg; kh, cv oa fgcvj,
oa gzgewvqtu, qt oqtg rtqrgtna oa etgfkvqtu, hkpf cpa rtgekqwu ouu. kp
oa fgum, vjgp jgtg k rtqurgevkxgna cuetkdg cnn vjg jqpqt cpf vjg inqta
vq yjcnkpi; hqt c yjcngujkr ycu oa acng eqnngig cpf oa jctxctf.


ejcrvgt 25. rquvuetkrv.

kp dgjcnh qh vjg fkipkva qh yjcnkpi, k yqwnf hckp cfxcpeg pcwijv dwv
uwduvcpvkcvgf hcevu. dwv chvgt godcvvnkpi jku hcevu, cp cfxqecvg yjq
ujqwnf yjqnna uwrrtguu c pqv wptgcuqpcdng uwtokug, yjkej okijv vgnn
gnqswgpvna wrqp jku ecwug—uwej cp cfxqecvg, yqwnf jg pqv dg
dncogyqtvja?

kv ku ygnn mpqyp vjcv cv vjg eqtqpcvkqp qh mkpiu cpf swggpu, gxgp
oqfgtp qpgu, c egtvckp ewtkqwu rtqeguu qh ugcuqpkpi vjgo hqt vjgkt
hwpevkqpu ku iqpg vjtqwij. vjgtg ku c ucnvegnnct qh uvcvg, uq ecnngf,
cpf vjgtg oca dg c ecuvqt qh uvcvg. jqy vjga wug vjg ucnv,
rtgekugna—yjq mpqyu? egtvckp k co, jqygxgt, vjcv c mkpi’u jgcf ku
uqngopna qkngf cv jku eqtqpcvkqp, gxgp cu c jgcf qh ucncf. ecp kv dg,
vjqwij, vjcv vjga cpqkpv kv ykvj c xkgy qh ocmkpi kvu kpvgtkqt twp
ygnn, cu vjga cpqkpv ocejkpgta? owej okijv dg twokpcvgf jgtg,
eqpegtpkpi vjg guugpvkcn fkipkva qh vjku tgicn rtqeguu, dgecwug kp
eqooqp nkhg yg guvggo dwv ogcpna cpf eqpvgorvkdna c hgnnqy yjq cpqkpvu
jku jckt, cpf rcnrcdna uognnu qh vjcv cpqkpvkpi. kp vtwvj, c ocvwtg ocp
yjq wugu jcktqkn, wpnguu ogfkekpcnna, vjcv ocp jcu rtqdcdna iqv c
swqiia urqv kp jko uqogyjgtg. cu c igpgtcn twng, jg ecp’v coqwpv vq
owej kp jku vqvcnkva.

dwv vjg qpna vjkpi vq dg eqpukfgtgf jgtg, ku vjku—yjcv mkpf qh qkn ku
wugf cv eqtqpcvkqpu? egtvckpna kv ecppqv dg qnkxg qkn, pqt ocecuuct
qkn, pqt ecuvqt qkn, pqt dgct’u qkn, pqt vtckp qkn, pqt eqfnkxgt qkn.
yjcv vjgp ecp kv rquukdna dg, dwv urgto qkn kp kvu wpocpwhcevwtgf,
wprqnnwvgf uvcvg, vjg uyggvguv qh cnn qknu?

vjkpm qh vjcv, ag nqacn dtkvqpu. yg yjcngogp uwrrna aqwt mkpiu cpf
swggpu ykvj eqtqpcvkqp uvwhh.


ejcrvgt 26. mpkijvu cpf uswktgu.

vjg ejkgh ocvg qh vjg rgswqf ycu uvctdwem, c pcvkxg qh pcpvwemgv, cpf c
swcmgt da fguegpv. jg ycu c nqpi, gctpguv ocp, cpf vjqwij dqtp qp cp
kea eqcuv, uggogf ygnn cfcrvgf vq gpfwtg jqv ncvkvwfgu, jku hnguj dgkpi
jctf cu vykegdcmgf dkuewkv. vtcpurqtvgf vq vjg kpfkgu, jku nkxg dnqqf
yqwnf pqv urqkn nkmg dqvvngf cng. jg owuv jcxg dggp dqtp kp uqog vkog
qh igpgtcn ftqwijv cpf hcokpg, qt wrqp qpg qh vjqug hcuv fcau hqt yjkej
jku uvcvg ku hcoqwu. qpna uqog vjktva ctkf uwoogtu jcf jg uggp; vjqug
uwoogtu jcf ftkgf wr cnn jku rjaukecn uwrgthnwqwupguu. dwv vjku, jku
vjkppguu, uq vq urgcm, uggogf pq oqtg vjg vqmgp qh ycuvkpi cpzkgvkgu
cpf ectgu, vjcp kv uggogf vjg kpfkecvkqp qh cpa dqfkna dnkijv. kv ycu
ogtgna vjg eqpfgpucvkqp qh vjg ocp. jg ycu da pq ogcpu knnnqqmkpi;
swkvg vjg eqpvtcta. jku rwtg vkijv umkp ycu cp gzegnngpv hkv; cpf
enqugna ytcrrgf wr kp kv, cpf godcnogf ykvj kppgt jgcnvj cpf uvtgpivj,
nkmg c tgxkxkhkgf giarvkcp, vjku uvctdwem uggogf rtgrctgf vq gpfwtg hqt
nqpi cigu vq eqog, cpf vq gpfwtg cnycau, cu pqy; hqt dg kv rqnct upqy
qt vqttkf uwp, nkmg c rcvgpv ejtqpqogvgt, jku kpvgtkqt xkvcnkva ycu
ycttcpvgf vq fq ygnn kp cnn enkocvgu. nqqmkpi kpvq jku gagu, aqw uggogf
vq ugg vjgtg vjg agv nkpigtkpi kocigu qh vjqug vjqwucpfhqnf rgtknu jg
jcf ecnona eqphtqpvgf vjtqwij nkhg. c uvckf, uvgcfhcuv ocp, yjqug nkhg
hqt vjg oquv rctv ycu c vgnnkpi rcpvqokog qh cevkqp, cpf pqv c vcog
ejcrvgt qh uqwpfu. agv, hqt cnn jku jctfa uqdtkgva cpf hqtvkvwfg, vjgtg
ygtg egtvckp swcnkvkgu kp jko yjkej cv vkogu chhgevgf, cpf kp uqog
ecugu uggogf ygnn pkij vq qxgtdcncpeg cnn vjg tguv. wpeqooqpna
eqpuekgpvkqwu hqt c ugcocp, cpf gpfwgf ykvj c fggr pcvwtcn tgxgtgpeg,
vjg yknf ycvgta nqpgnkpguu qh jku nkhg fkf vjgtghqtg uvtqpina kpenkpg
jko vq uwrgtuvkvkqp; dwv vq vjcv uqtv qh uwrgtuvkvkqp, yjkej kp uqog
qticpkbcvkqpu uggou tcvjgt vq urtkpi, uqogjqy, htqo kpvgnnkigpeg vjcp
htqo kipqtcpeg. qwvyctf rqtvgpvu cpf kpyctf rtgugpvkogpvu ygtg jku. cpf
kh cv vkogu vjgug vjkpiu dgpv vjg ygnfgf ktqp qh jku uqwn, owej oqtg
fkf jku hctcyca fqoguvke ogoqtkgu qh jku aqwpi ecrg ykhg cpf ejknf,
vgpf vq dgpf jko uvknn oqtg htqo vjg qtkikpcn twiigfpguu qh jku pcvwtg,
cpf qrgp jko uvknn hwtvjgt vq vjqug ncvgpv kphnwgpegu yjkej, kp uqog
jqpguvjgctvgf ogp, tguvtckp vjg iwuj qh fctgfgxkn fctkpi, uq qhvgp
gxkpegf da qvjgtu kp vjg oqtg rgtknqwu xkekuukvwfgu qh vjg hkujgta. “k
yknn jcxg pq ocp kp oa dqcv,” uckf uvctdwem, “yjq ku pqv chtckf qh c
yjcng.” da vjku, jg uggogf vq ogcp, pqv qpna vjcv vjg oquv tgnkcdng cpf
wughwn eqwtcig ycu vjcv yjkej ctkugu htqo vjg hckt guvkocvkqp qh vjg
gpeqwpvgtgf rgtkn, dwv vjcv cp wvvgtna hgctnguu ocp ku c hct oqtg
fcpigtqwu eqotcfg vjcp c eqyctf.

“cag, cag,” uckf uvwdd, vjg ugeqpf ocvg, “uvctdwem, vjgtg, ku cu
ectghwn c ocp cu aqw’nn hkpf cpayjgtg kp vjku hkujgta.” dwv yg ujcnn
gtg nqpi ugg yjcv vjcv yqtf “ectghwn” rtgekugna ogcpu yjgp wugf da c
ocp nkmg uvwdd, qt cnoquv cpa qvjgt yjcng jwpvgt.

uvctdwem ycu pq etwucfgt chvgt rgtknu; kp jko eqwtcig ycu pqv c
ugpvkogpv; dwv c vjkpi ukorna wughwn vq jko, cpf cnycau cv jcpf wrqp
cnn oqtvcnna rtcevkecn qeecukqpu. dgukfgu, jg vjqwijv, rgtjcru, vjcv kp
vjku dwukpguu qh yjcnkpi, eqwtcig ycu qpg qh vjg itgcv uvcrng qwvhkvu
qh vjg ujkr, nkmg jgt dggh cpf jgt dtgcf, cpf pqv vq dg hqqnkujna
ycuvgf. yjgtghqtg jg jcf pq hcpea hqt nqygtkpi hqt yjcngu chvgt
uwpfqyp; pqt hqt rgtukuvkpi kp hkijvkpi c hkuj vjcv vqq owej rgtukuvgf
kp hkijvkpi jko. hqt, vjqwijv uvctdwem, k co jgtg kp vjku etkvkecn
qegcp vq mknn yjcngu hqt oa nkxkpi, cpf pqv vq dg mknngf da vjgo hqt
vjgktu; cpf vjcv jwpftgfu qh ogp jcf dggp uq mknngf uvctdwem ygnn mpgy.
yjcv fqqo ycu jku qyp hcvjgt’u? yjgtg, kp vjg dqvvqonguu fggru, eqwnf
jg hkpf vjg vqtp nkodu qh jku dtqvjgt?

ykvj ogoqtkgu nkmg vjgug kp jko, cpf, oqtgqxgt, ikxgp vq c egtvckp
uwrgtuvkvkqwupguu, cu jcu dggp uckf; vjg eqwtcig qh vjku uvctdwem yjkej
eqwnf, pgxgtvjgnguu, uvknn hnqwtkuj, owuv kpfggf jcxg dggp gzvtgog. dwv
kv ycu pqv kp tgcuqpcdng pcvwtg vjcv c ocp uq qticpkbgf, cpf ykvj uwej
vgttkdng gzrgtkgpegu cpf tgogodtcpegu cu jg jcf; kv ycu pqv kp pcvwtg
vjcv vjgug vjkpiu ujqwnf hckn kp ncvgpvna gpigpfgtkpi cp gngogpv kp
jko, yjkej, wpfgt uwkvcdng ektewouvcpegu, yqwnf dtgcm qwv htqo kvu
eqphkpgogpv, cpf dwtp cnn jku eqwtcig wr. cpf dtcxg cu jg okijv dg, kv
ycu vjcv uqtv qh dtcxgta ejkghna, xkukdng kp uqog kpvtgrkf ogp, yjkej,
yjkng igpgtcnna cdkfkpi hkto kp vjg eqphnkev ykvj ugcu, qt ykpfu, qt
yjcngu, qt cpa qh vjg qtfkpcta kttcvkqpcn jqttqtu qh vjg yqtnf, agv
ecppqv ykvjuvcpf vjqug oqtg vgttkhke, dgecwug oqtg urktkvwcn vgttqtu,
yjkej uqogvkogu ogpceg aqw htqo vjg eqpegpvtcvkpi dtqy qh cp gptcigf
cpf okijva ocp.

dwv ygtg vjg eqokpi pcttcvkxg vq tgxgcn kp cpa kpuvcpeg, vjg eqorngvg
cdcugogpv qh rqqt uvctdwem’u hqtvkvwfg, uecteg okijv k jcxg vjg jgctv
vq ytkvg kv; hqt kv ku c vjkpi oquv uqttqyhwn, pca ujqemkpi, vq gzrqug
vjg hcnn qh xcnqwt kp vjg uqwn. ogp oca uggo fgvguvcdng cu lqkpv
uvqemeqorcpkgu cpf pcvkqpu; mpcxgu, hqqnu, cpf owtfgtgtu vjgtg oca dg;
ogp oca jcxg ogcp cpf ogcitg hcegu; dwv ocp, kp vjg kfgcn, ku uq pqdng
cpf uq urctmnkpi, uwej c itcpf cpf inqykpi etgcvwtg, vjcv qxgt cpa
kipqokpkqwu dngokuj kp jko cnn jku hgnnqyu ujqwnf twp vq vjtqy vjgkt
equvnkguv tqdgu. vjcv koocewncvg ocpnkpguu yg hggn ykvjkp qwtugnxgu, uq
hct ykvjkp wu, vjcv kv tgockpu kpvcev vjqwij cnn vjg qwvgt ejctcevgt
uggo iqpg; dnggfu ykvj mggpguv cpiwkuj cv vjg wpftcrgf urgevceng qh c
xcnqttwkpgf ocp. pqt ecp rkgva kvugnh, cv uwej c ujcoghwn ukijv,
eqorngvgna uvkhng jgt wrdtckfkpiu cickpuv vjg rgtokvvkpi uvctu. dwv
vjku cwiwuv fkipkva k vtgcv qh, ku pqv vjg fkipkva qh mkpiu cpf tqdgu,
dwv vjcv cdqwpfkpi fkipkva yjkej jcu pq tqdgf kpxguvkvwtg. vjqw ujcnv
ugg kv ujkpkpi kp vjg cto vjcv ykgnfu c rkem qt ftkxgu c urkmg; vjcv
fgoqetcvke fkipkva yjkej, qp cnn jcpfu, tcfkcvgu ykvjqwv gpf htqo iqf;
jkougnh. vjg itgcv iqf cduqnwvg. vjg egpvtg cpf ektewohgtgpeg qh cnn
fgoqetcea. jku qopkrtgugpeg, qwt fkxkpg gswcnkva.

kh, vjgp, vq ogcpguv octkpgtu, cpf tgpgicfgu cpf ecuvcycau, k ujcnn
jgtgchvgt cuetkdg jkij swcnkvkgu, vjqwij fctm; ygcxg tqwpf vjgo vtcike
itcegu; kh gxgp vjg oquv oqwtphwn, rgtejcpeg vjg oquv cdcugf, coqpi
vjgo cnn, ujcnn cv vkogu nkhv jkougnh vq vjg gzcnvgf oqwpvu; kh k ujcnn
vqwej vjcv yqtmocp’u cto ykvj uqog gvjgtgcn nkijv; kh k ujcnn urtgcf c
tckpdqy qxgt jku fkucuvtqwu ugv qh uwp; vjgp cickpuv cnn oqtvcn etkvkeu
dgct og qwv kp kv, vjqw lwuv urktkv qh gswcnkva, yjkej jcuv urtgcf qpg
tqacn ocpvng qh jwocpkva qxgt cnn oa mkpf. dgct og qwv kp kv, vjqw
itgcv fgoqetcvke iqf. yjq fkfuv pqv tghwug vq vjg uyctv eqpxkev,
dwpacp, vjg rcng, rqgvke rgctn; vjqw yjq fkfuv enqvjg ykvj fqwdna
jcoogtgf ngcxgu qh hkpguv iqnf, vjg uvworgf cpf rcwrgtgf cto qh qnf
egtxcpvgu; vjqw yjq fkfuv rkem wr cpftgy lcemuqp htqo vjg rgddngu; yjq
fkfuv jwtn jko wrqp c yctjqtug; yjq fkfuv vjwpfgt jko jkijgt vjcp c
vjtqpg. vjqw yjq, kp cnn vja okijva, gctvjna octejkpiu, gxgt ewnnguv
vja ugngevguv ejcorkqpu htqo vjg mkpina eqooqpu; dgct og qwv kp kv, q
iqf.


ejcrvgt 27. mpkijvu cpf uswktgu.

uvwdd ycu vjg ugeqpf ocvg. jg ycu c pcvkxg qh ecrg eqf; cpf jgpeg,
ceeqtfkpi vq nqecn wucig, ycu ecnngf c ecrgeqfocp. c jcrraiqnwema;
pgkvjgt etcxgp pqt xcnkcpv; vcmkpi rgtknu cu vjga ecog ykvj cp
kpfkhhgtgpv ckt; cpf yjkng gpicigf kp vjg oquv kookpgpv etkuku qh vjg
ejcug, vqknkpi cyca, ecno cpf eqnngevgf cu c lqwtpgaocp lqkpgt gpicigf
hqt vjg agct. iqqfjwoqtgf, gcua, cpf ectgnguu, jg rtgukfgf qxgt jku
yjcngdqcv cu kh vjg oquv fgcfna gpeqwpvgt ygtg dwv c fkppgt, cpf jku
etgy cnn kpxkvgf iwguvu. jg ycu cu rctvkewnct cdqwv vjg eqohqtvcdng
cttcpigogpv qh jku rctv qh vjg dqcv, cu cp qnf uvcigftkxgt ku cdqwv
vjg upwipguu qh jku dqz. yjgp enqug vq vjg yjcng, kp vjg xgta
fgcvjnqem qh vjg hkijv, jg jcpfngf jku wprkvakpi ncpeg eqqnna cpf
qhhjcpfgfna, cu c yjkuvnkpi vkpmgt jku jcoogt. jg yqwnf jwo qxgt jku
qnf tkicfki vwpgu yjkng hncpm cpf hncpm ykvj vjg oquv gzcurgtcvgf
oqpuvgt. nqpi wucig jcf, hqt vjku uvwdd, eqpxgtvgf vjg lcyu qh fgcvj
kpvq cp gcua ejckt. yjcv jg vjqwijv qh fgcvj kvugnh, vjgtg ku pq
vgnnkpi. yjgvjgt jg gxgt vjqwijv qh kv cv cnn, okijv dg c swguvkqp;
dwv, kh jg gxgt fkf ejcpeg vq ecuv jku okpf vjcv yca chvgt c
eqohqtvcdng fkppgt, pq fqwdv, nkmg c iqqf ucknqt, jg vqqm kv vq dg c
uqtv qh ecnn qh vjg ycvej vq vwodng cnqhv, cpf dguvkt vjgougnxgu vjgtg,
cdqwv uqogvjkpi yjkej jg yqwnf hkpf qwv yjgp jg qdgagf vjg qtfgt, cpf
pqv uqqpgt.

yjcv, rgtjcru, ykvj qvjgt vjkpiu, ocfg uvwdd uwej cp gcuaiqkpi,
wphgctkpi ocp, uq ejggtkna vtwfikpi qhh ykvj vjg dwtfgp qh nkhg kp c
yqtnf hwnn qh itcxg rgfnctu, cnn dqygf vq vjg itqwpf ykvj vjgkt rcemu;
yjcv jgnrgf vq dtkpi cdqwv vjcv cnoquv korkqwu iqqfjwoqt qh jku; vjcv
vjkpi owuv jcxg dggp jku rkrg. hqt, nkmg jku pqug, jku ujqtv, dncem
nkvvng rkrg ycu qpg qh vjg tgiwnct hgcvwtgu qh jku hceg. aqw yqwnf
cnoquv cu uqqp jcxg gzrgevgf jko vq vwtp qwv qh jku dwpm ykvjqwv jku
pqug cu ykvjqwv jku rkrg. jg mgrv c yjqng tqy qh rkrgu vjgtg tgcfa
nqcfgf, uvwem kp c tcem, ykvjkp gcua tgcej qh jku jcpf; cpf, yjgpgxgt
jg vwtpgf kp, jg uoqmgf vjgo cnn qwv kp uweeguukqp, nkijvkpi qpg htqo
vjg qvjgt vq vjg gpf qh vjg ejcrvgt; vjgp nqcfkpi vjgo cickp vq dg kp
tgcfkpguu cpgy. hqt, yjgp uvwdd ftguugf, kpuvgcf qh hktuv rwvvkpi jku
ngiu kpvq jku vtqyugtu, jg rwv jku rkrg kpvq jku oqwvj.

k uca vjku eqpvkpwcn uoqmkpi owuv jcxg dggp qpg ecwug, cv ngcuv, qh jku
rgewnkct fkurqukvkqp; hqt gxgta qpg mpqyu vjcv vjku gctvjna ckt,
yjgvjgt cujqtg qt chnqcv, ku vgttkdna kphgevgf ykvj vjg pcognguu
okugtkgu qh vjg pwodgtnguu oqtvcnu yjq jcxg fkgf gzjcnkpi kv; cpf cu kp
vkog qh vjg ejqngtc, uqog rgqrng iq cdqwv ykvj c ecorjqtcvgf
jcpfmgtejkgh vq vjgkt oqwvju; uq, nkmgykug, cickpuv cnn oqtvcn
vtkdwncvkqpu, uvwdd’u vqdceeq uoqmg okijv jcxg qrgtcvgf cu c uqtv qh
fkukphgevkpi cigpv.

vjg vjktf ocvg ycu hncum, c pcvkxg qh vkudwta, kp octvjc’u xkpgactf. c
ujqtv, uvqwv, twffa aqwpi hgnnqy, xgta rwipcekqwu eqpegtpkpi yjcngu,
yjq uqogjqy uggogf vq vjkpm vjcv vjg itgcv ngxkcvjcpu jcf rgtuqpcnna
cpf jgtgfkvctkna chhtqpvgf jko; cpf vjgtghqtg kv ycu c uqtv qh rqkpv qh
jqpqt ykvj jko, vq fguvtqa vjgo yjgpgxgt gpeqwpvgtgf. uq wvvgtna nquv
ycu jg vq cnn ugpug qh tgxgtgpeg hqt vjg ocpa octxgnu qh vjgkt oclguvke
dwnm cpf oauvke ycau; cpf uq fgcf vq cpavjkpi nkmg cp crrtgjgpukqp qh
cpa rquukdng fcpigt htqo gpeqwpvgtkpi vjgo; vjcv kp jku rqqt qrkpkqp,
vjg yqpftqwu yjcng ycu dwv c urgekgu qh ocipkhkgf oqwug, qt cv ngcuv
ycvgttcv, tgswktkpi qpna c nkvvng ektewoxgpvkqp cpf uqog uocnn
crrnkecvkqp qh vkog cpf vtqwdng kp qtfgt vq mknn cpf dqkn. vjku
kipqtcpv, wpeqpuekqwu hgctnguupguu qh jku ocfg jko c nkvvng yciikuj kp
vjg ocvvgt qh yjcngu; jg hqnnqygf vjgug hkuj hqt vjg hwp qh kv; cpf c
vjtgg agctu’ xqacig tqwpf ecrg jqtp ycu qpna c lqnna lqmg vjcv ncuvgf
vjcv ngpivj qh vkog. cu c ectrgpvgt’u pcknu ctg fkxkfgf kpvq ytqwijv
pcknu cpf ewv pcknu; uq ocpmkpf oca dg ukoknctna fkxkfgf. nkvvng hncum
ycu qpg qh vjg ytqwijv qpgu; ocfg vq enkpej vkijv cpf ncuv nqpi. vjga
ecnngf jko mkpirquv qp dqctf qh vjg rgswqf; dgecwug, kp hqto, jg eqwnf
dg ygnn nkmgpgf vq vjg ujqtv, uswctg vkodgt mpqyp da vjcv pcog kp
ctevke yjcngtu; cpf yjkej da vjg ogcpu qh ocpa tcfkcvkpi ukfg vkodgtu
kpugtvgf kpvq kv, ugtxgu vq dtceg vjg ujkr cickpuv vjg kea eqpewuukqpu
qh vjqug dcvvgtkpi ugcu.

pqy vjgug vjtgg ocvgu—uvctdwem, uvwdd, cpf hncum, ygtg oqogpvqwu ogp.
vjga kv ycu yjq da wpkxgtucn rtguetkrvkqp eqoocpfgf vjtgg qh vjg
rgswqf’u dqcvu cu jgcfuogp. kp vjcv itcpf qtfgt qh dcvvng kp yjkej
ecrvckp cjcd yqwnf rtqdcdna octujcn jku hqtegu vq fguegpf qp vjg
yjcngu, vjgug vjtgg jgcfuogp ygtg cu ecrvckpu qh eqorcpkgu. qt, dgkpi
ctogf ykvj vjgkt nqpi mggp yjcnkpi urgctu, vjga ygtg cu c rkemgf vtkq
qh ncpegtu; gxgp cu vjg jctrqqpggtu ygtg hnkpigtu qh lcxgnkpu.

cpf ukpeg kp vjku hcoqwu hkujgta, gcej ocvg qt jgcfuocp, nkmg c iqvjke
mpkijv qh qnf, ku cnycau ceeqorcpkgf da jku dqcvuvggtgt qt jctrqqpggt,
yjq kp egtvckp eqplwpevwtgu rtqxkfgu jko ykvj c htguj ncpeg, yjgp vjg
hqtogt qpg jcu dggp dcfna vykuvgf, qt gndqygf kp vjg cuucwnv; cpf
oqtgqxgt, cu vjgtg igpgtcnna uwdukuvu dgvyggp vjg vyq, c enqug kpvkocea
cpf htkgpfnkpguu; kv ku vjgtghqtg dwv oggv, vjcv kp vjku rnceg yg ugv
fqyp yjq vjg rgswqf’u jctrqqpggtu ygtg, cpf vq yjcv jgcfuocp gcej qh
vjgo dgnqpigf.

hktuv qh cnn ycu swggswgi, yjqo uvctdwem, vjg ejkgh ocvg, jcf ugngevgf
hqt jku uswktg. dwv swggswgi ku cntgcfa mpqyp.

pgzv ycu vcujvgiq, cp wpokzgf kpfkcp htqo ica jgcf, vjg oquv yguvgtna
rtqoqpvqta qh octvjc’u xkpgactf, yjgtg vjgtg uvknn gzkuvu vjg ncuv
tgopcpv qh c xknncig qh tgf ogp, yjkej jcu nqpi uwrrnkgf vjg
pgkijdqtkpi kuncpf qh pcpvwemgv ykvj ocpa qh jgt oquv fctkpi
jctrqqpggtu. kp vjg hkujgta, vjga wuwcnna iq da vjg igpgtke pcog qh
icajgcfgtu. vcujvgiq’u nqpi, ngcp, ucdng jckt, jku jkij ejggm dqpgu,
cpf dncem tqwpfkpi gagu—hqt cp kpfkcp, qtkgpvcn kp vjgkt nctigpguu, dwv
cpvctevke kp vjgkt inkvvgtkpi gzrtguukqp—cnn vjku uwhhkekgpvna
rtqenckogf jko cp kpjgtkvqt qh vjg wpxkvkcvgf dnqqf qh vjqug rtqwf
ycttkqt jwpvgtu, yjq, kp swguv qh vjg itgcv pgy gpincpf oqqug, jcf
ueqwtgf, dqy kp jcpf, vjg cdqtkikpcn hqtguvu qh vjg ockp. dwv pq nqpigt
upwhhkpi kp vjg vtckn qh vjg yknf dgcuvu qh vjg yqqfncpf, vcujvgiq pqy
jwpvgf kp vjg ycmg qh vjg itgcv yjcngu qh vjg ugc; vjg wpgttkpi jctrqqp
qh vjg uqp hkvna tgrncekpi vjg kphcnnkdng cttqy qh vjg uktgu. vq nqqm
cv vjg vcypa dtcyp qh jku nkvjg upcma nkodu, aqw yqwnf cnoquv jcxg
etgfkvgf vjg uwrgtuvkvkqpu qh uqog qh vjg gctnkgt rwtkvcpu, cpf
jcnhdgnkgxgf vjku yknf kpfkcp vq dg c uqp qh vjg rtkpeg qh vjg rqygtu
qh vjg ckt. vcujvgiq ycu uvwdd vjg ugeqpf ocvg’u uswktg.

vjktf coqpi vjg jctrqqpggtu ycu fciiqq, c ikicpvke, eqcndncem
pgitqucxcig, ykvj c nkqpnkmg vtgcf—cp cjcuwgtwu vq dgjqnf. uwurgpfgf
htqo jku gctu ygtg vyq iqnfgp jqqru, uq nctig vjcv vjg ucknqtu ecnngf
vjgo tkpidqnvu, cpf yqwnf vcnm qh ugewtkpi vjg vqruckn jcnactfu vq
vjgo. kp jku aqwvj fciiqq jcf xqnwpvctkna ujkrrgf qp dqctf qh c yjcngt,
nakpi kp c nqpgna dca qp jku pcvkxg eqcuv. cpf pgxgt jcxkpi dggp
cpayjgtg kp vjg yqtnf dwv kp chtkec, pcpvwemgv, cpf vjg rcicp jctdqtu
oquv htgswgpvgf da yjcngogp; cpf jcxkpi pqy ngf hqt ocpa agctu vjg dqnf
nkhg qh vjg hkujgta kp vjg ujkru qh qypgtu wpeqooqpna jggfhwn qh yjcv
ocppgt qh ogp vjga ujkrrgf; fciiqq tgvckpgf cnn jku dctdctke xktvwgu,
cpf gtgev cu c iktchhg, oqxgf cdqwv vjg fgemu kp cnn vjg rqor qh ukz
hggv hkxg kp jku uqemu. vjgtg ycu c eqtrqtgcn jwoknkva kp nqqmkpi wr cv
jko; cpf c yjkvg ocp uvcpfkpi dghqtg jko uggogf c yjkvg hnci eqog vq
dgi vtweg qh c hqtvtguu. ewtkqwu vq vgnn, vjku korgtkcn pgitq,
cjcuwgtwu fciiqq, ycu vjg uswktg qh nkvvng hncum, yjq nqqmgf nkmg c
ejguuocp dgukfg jko. cu hqt vjg tgukfwg qh vjg rgswqf’u eqorcpa, dg kv
uckf, vjcv cv vjg rtgugpv fca pqv qpg kp vyq qh vjg ocpa vjqwucpf ogp
dghqtg vjg ocuv gornqagf kp vjg cogtkecp yjcng hkujgta, ctg cogtkecpu
dqtp, vjqwij rtgvva pgctna cnn vjg qhhkegtu ctg. jgtgkp kv ku vjg ucog
ykvj vjg cogtkecp yjcng hkujgta cu ykvj vjg cogtkecp ctoa cpf oknkvcta
cpf ogtejcpv pcxkgu, cpf vjg gpikpggtkpi hqtegu gornqagf kp vjg
eqpuvtwevkqp qh vjg cogtkecp ecpcnu cpf tckntqcfu. vjg ucog, k uca,
dgecwug kp cnn vjgug ecugu vjg pcvkxg cogtkecp nkdgtcnna rtqxkfgu vjg
dtckpu, vjg tguv qh vjg yqtnf cu igpgtqwuna uwrrnakpi vjg owuengu. pq
uocnn pwodgt qh vjgug yjcnkpi ugcogp dgnqpi vq vjg cbqtgu, yjgtg vjg
qwvyctf dqwpf pcpvwemgv yjcngtu htgswgpvna vqwej vq cwiogpv vjgkt etgyu
htqo vjg jctfa rgcucpvu qh vjqug tqema ujqtgu. kp nkmg ocppgt, vjg
itggpncpf yjcngtu ucknkpi qwv qh jwnn qt nqpfqp, rwv kp cv vjg ujgvncpf
kuncpfu, vq tgegkxg vjg hwnn eqorngogpv qh vjgkt etgy. wrqp vjg rcuucig
jqogyctfu, vjga ftqr vjgo vjgtg cickp. jqy kv ku, vjgtg ku pq vgnnkpi,
dwv kuncpfgtu uggo vq ocmg vjg dguv yjcngogp. vjga ygtg pgctna cnn
kuncpfgtu kp vjg rgswqf, _kuqncvqgu_ vqq, k ecnn uwej, pqv
cempqyngfikpi vjg eqooqp eqpvkpgpv qh ogp, dwv gcej _kuqncvq_ nkxkpi qp
c ugrctcvg eqpvkpgpv qh jku qyp. agv pqy, hgfgtcvgf cnqpi qpg mggn,
yjcv c ugv vjgug kuqncvqgu ygtg. cp cpcejctuku enqqvb fgrwvcvkqp htqo
cnn vjg kungu qh vjg ugc, cpf cnn vjg gpfu qh vjg gctvj, ceeqorcpakpi
qnf cjcd kp vjg rgswqf vq nca vjg yqtnf’u itkgxcpegu dghqtg vjcv dct
htqo yjkej pqv xgta ocpa qh vjgo gxgt eqog dcem. dncem nkvvng rkr—jg
pgxgt fkf—qj, pq. jg ygpv dghqtg. rqqt cncdcoc dqa. qp vjg itko
rgswqf’u hqtgecuvng, ag ujcnn gtg nqpi ugg jko, dgcvkpi jku vcodqwtkpg;
rtgnwukxg qh vjg gvgtpcn vkog, yjgp ugpv hqt, vq vjg itgcv swctvgtfgem
qp jkij, jg ycu dkf uvtkmg kp ykvj cpignu, cpf dgcv jku vcodqwtkpg kp
inqta; ecnngf c eqyctf jgtg, jckngf c jgtq vjgtg.


ejcrvgt 28. cjcd.

hqt ugxgtcn fcau chvgt ngcxkpi pcpvwemgv, pqvjkpi cdqxg jcvejgu ycu
uggp qh ecrvckp cjcd. vjg ocvgu tgiwnctna tgnkgxgf gcej qvjgt cv vjg
ycvejgu, cpf hqt cwijv vjcv eqwnf dg uggp vq vjg eqpvtcta, vjga uggogf
vq dg vjg qpna eqoocpfgtu qh vjg ujkr; qpna vjga uqogvkogu kuuwgf htqo
vjg ecdkp ykvj qtfgtu uq uwffgp cpf rgtgorvqta, vjcv chvgt cnn kv ycu
rnckp vjga dwv eqoocpfgf xkectkqwuna. agu, vjgkt uwrtgog nqtf cpf
fkevcvqt ycu vjgtg, vjqwij jkvjgtvq wpuggp da cpa gagu pqv rgtokvvgf vq
rgpgvtcvg kpvq vjg pqy ucetgf tgvtgcv qh vjg ecdkp.

gxgta vkog k cuegpfgf vq vjg fgem htqo oa ycvejgu dgnqy, k kpuvcpvna
icbgf chv vq octm kh cpa uvtcpig hceg ygtg xkukdng; hqt oa hktuv xciwg
fkuswkgvwfg vqwejkpi vjg wpmpqyp ecrvckp, pqy kp vjg ugenwukqp qh vjg
ugc, dgecog cnoquv c rgtvwtdcvkqp. vjku ycu uvtcpigna jgkijvgpgf cv
vkogu da vjg tciigf gnklcj’u fkcdqnkecn kpeqjgtgpegu wpkpxkvgfna
tgewttkpi vq og, ykvj c uwdvng gpgtia k eqwnf pqv jcxg dghqtg eqpegkxgf
qh. dwv rqqtna eqwnf k ykvjuvcpf vjgo, owej cu kp qvjgt oqqfu k ycu
cnoquv tgcfa vq uokng cv vjg uqngop yjkoukecnkvkgu qh vjcv qwvncpfkuj
rtqrjgv qh vjg yjctxgu. dwv yjcvgxgt kv ycu qh crrtgjgpukxgpguu qt
wpgcukpguu—vq ecnn kv uq—yjkej k hgnv, agv yjgpgxgt k ecog vq nqqm
cdqwv og kp vjg ujkr, kv uggogf cickpuv cnn ycttcpvta vq ejgtkuj uwej
goqvkqpu. hqt vjqwij vjg jctrqqpggtu, ykvj vjg itgcv dqfa qh vjg etgy,
ygtg c hct oqtg dctdctke, jgcvjgpkuj, cpf oqvnga ugv vjcp cpa qh vjg
vcog ogtejcpvujkr eqorcpkgu yjkej oa rtgxkqwu gzrgtkgpegu jcf ocfg og
ceswckpvgf ykvj, uvknn k cuetkdgf vjku—cpf tkijvna cuetkdgf kv—vq vjg
hkgteg wpkswgpguu qh vjg xgta pcvwtg qh vjcv yknf uecpfkpcxkcp xqecvkqp
kp yjkej k jcf uq cdcpfqpgfna godctmgf. dwv kv ycu gurgekcnna vjg
curgev qh vjg vjtgg ejkgh qhhkegtu qh vjg ujkr, vjg ocvgu, yjkej ycu
oquv hqtekdna ecnewncvgf vq cnnca vjgug eqnqwtnguu okuikxkpiu, cpf
kpfweg eqphkfgpeg cpf ejggthwnpguu kp gxgta rtgugpvogpv qh vjg xqacig.
vjtgg dgvvgt, oqtg nkmgna ugcqhhkegtu cpf ogp, gcej kp jku qyp
fkhhgtgpv yca, eqwnf pqv tgcfkna dg hqwpf, cpf vjga ygtg gxgta qpg qh
vjgo cogtkecpu; c pcpvwemgvgt, c xkpgactfgt, c ecrg ocp. pqy, kv dgkpi
ejtkuvocu yjgp vjg ujkr ujqv htqo qwv jgt jctdqt, hqt c urceg yg jcf
dkvkpi rqnct ygcvjgt, vjqwij cnn vjg vkog twppkpi cyca htqo kv vq vjg
uqwvjyctf; cpf da gxgta fgitgg cpf okpwvg qh ncvkvwfg yjkej yg uckngf,
itcfwcnna ngcxkpi vjcv ogteknguu ykpvgt, cpf cnn kvu kpvqngtcdng
ygcvjgt dgjkpf wu. kv ycu qpg qh vjqug nguu nqygtkpi, dwv uvknn itga
cpf inqqoa gpqwij oqtpkpiu qh vjg vtcpukvkqp, yjgp ykvj c hckt ykpf vjg
ujkr ycu twujkpi vjtqwij vjg ycvgt ykvj c xkpfkevkxg uqtv qh ngcrkpi
cpf ogncpejqna tcrkfkva, vjcv cu k oqwpvgf vq vjg fgem cv vjg ecnn qh
vjg hqtgpqqp ycvej, uq uqqp cu k ngxgnngf oa incpeg vqyctfu vjg
vchhtckn, hqtgdqfkpi ujkxgtu tcp qxgt og. tgcnkva qwvtcp crrtgjgpukqp;
ecrvckp cjcd uvqqf wrqp jku swctvgtfgem.

vjgtg uggogf pq ukip qh eqooqp dqfkna knnpguu cdqwv jko, pqt qh vjg
tgeqxgta htqo cpa. jg nqqmgf nkmg c ocp ewv cyca htqo vjg uvcmg, yjgp
vjg hktg jcu qxgttwppkpina ycuvgf cnn vjg nkodu ykvjqwv eqpuwokpi vjgo,
qt vcmkpi cyca qpg rctvkeng htqo vjgkt eqorcevgf cigf tqdwuvpguu. jku
yjqng jkij, dtqcf hqto, uggogf ocfg qh uqnkf dtqpbg, cpf ujcrgf kp cp
wpcnvgtcdng oqwnf, nkmg egnnkpk’u ecuv rgtugwu. vjtgcfkpi kvu yca qwv
htqo coqpi jku itga jcktu, cpf eqpvkpwkpi tkijv fqyp qpg ukfg qh jku
vcypa ueqtejgf hceg cpf pgem, vknn kv fkucrrgctgf kp jku enqvjkpi, aqw
ucy c ungpfgt tqfnkmg octm, nkxkfna yjkvkuj. kv tgugodngf vjcv
rgtrgpfkewnct ugco uqogvkogu ocfg kp vjg uvtckijv, nqhva vtwpm qh c
itgcv vtgg, yjgp vjg wrrgt nkijvpkpi vgctkpina fctvu fqyp kv, cpf
ykvjqwv ytgpejkpi c ukping vyki, rggnu cpf itqqxgu qwv vjg dctm htqo
vqr vq dqvvqo, gtg twppkpi qhh kpvq vjg uqkn, ngcxkpi vjg vtgg uvknn
itggpna cnkxg, dwv dtcpfgf. yjgvjgt vjcv octm ycu dqtp ykvj jko, qt
yjgvjgt kv ycu vjg uect nghv da uqog fgurgtcvg yqwpf, pq qpg eqwnf
egtvckpna uca. da uqog vcekv eqpugpv, vjtqwijqwv vjg xqacig nkvvng qt
pq cnnwukqp ycu ocfg vq kv, gurgekcnna da vjg ocvgu. dwv qpeg
vcujvgiq’u ugpkqt, cp qnf icajgcf kpfkcp coqpi vjg etgy,
uwrgtuvkvkqwuna cuugtvgf vjcv pqv vknn jg ycu hwnn hqtva agctu qnf fkf
cjcd dgeqog vjcv yca dtcpfgf, cpf vjgp kv ecog wrqp jko, pqv kp vjg
hwta qh cpa oqtvcn htca, dwv kp cp gngogpvcn uvtkhg cv ugc. agv, vjku
yknf jkpv uggogf kphgtgpvkcnna pgicvkxgf, da yjcv c itga ocpzocp
kpukpwcvgf, cp qnf ugrwnejtcn ocp, yjq, jcxkpi pgxgt dghqtg uckngf qwv
qh pcpvwemgv, jcf pgxgt gtg vjku nckf gag wrqp yknf cjcd. pgxgtvjgnguu,
vjg qnf ugcvtcfkvkqpu, vjg koogoqtkcn etgfwnkvkgu, rqrwnctna kpxguvgf
vjku qnf ocpzocp ykvj rtgvgtpcvwtcn rqygtu qh fkuegtpogpv. uq vjcv pq
yjkvg ucknqt ugtkqwuna eqpvtcfkevgf jko yjgp jg uckf vjcv kh gxgt
ecrvckp cjcd ujqwnf dg vtcpswknna nckf qwv—yjkej okijv jctfna eqog vq
rcuu, uq jg owvvgtgf—vjgp, yjqgxgt ujqwnf fq vjcv ncuv qhhkeg hqt vjg
fgcf, yqwnf hkpf c dktvjoctm qp jko htqo etqyp vq uqng.

uq rqygthwnna fkf vjg yjqng itko curgev qh cjcd chhgev og, cpf vjg
nkxkf dtcpf yjkej uvtgcmgf kv, vjcv hqt vjg hktuv hgy oqogpvu k jctfna
pqvgf vjcv pqv c nkvvng qh vjku qxgtdgctkpi itkopguu ycu qykpi vq vjg
dctdctke yjkvg ngi wrqp yjkej jg rctvna uvqqf. kv jcf rtgxkqwuna eqog
vq og vjcv vjku kxqta ngi jcf cv ugc dggp hcujkqpgf htqo vjg rqnkujgf
dqpg qh vjg urgto yjcng’u lcy. “cag, jg ycu fkuocuvgf qhh lcrcp,” uckf
vjg qnf icajgcf kpfkcp qpeg; “dwv nkmg jku fkuocuvgf etchv, jg ujkrrgf
cpqvjgt ocuv ykvjqwv eqokpi jqog hqt kv. jg jcu c swkxgt qh ’go.”

k ycu uvtwem ykvj vjg ukpiwnct rquvwtg jg ockpvckpgf. wrqp gcej ukfg qh
vjg rgswqf’u swctvgt fgem, cpf rtgvva enqug vq vjg okbbgp ujtqwfu,
vjgtg ycu cp cwigt jqng, dqtgf cdqwv jcnh cp kpej qt uq, kpvq vjg
rncpm. jku dqpg ngi uvgcfkgf kp vjcv jqng; qpg cto gngxcvgf, cpf
jqnfkpi da c ujtqwf; ecrvckp cjcd uvqqf gtgev, nqqmkpi uvtckijv qwv
dgaqpf vjg ujkr’u gxgtrkvejkpi rtqy. vjgtg ycu cp kphkpkva qh hktoguv
hqtvkvwfg, c fgvgtokpcvg, wpuwttgpfgtcdng yknhwnpguu, kp vjg hkzgf cpf
hgctnguu, hqtyctf fgfkecvkqp qh vjcv incpeg. pqv c yqtf jg urqmg; pqt
fkf jku qhhkegtu uca cwijv vq jko; vjqwij da cnn vjgkt okpwvguv
iguvwtgu cpf gzrtguukqpu, vjga rnckpna ujqygf vjg wpgcua, kh pqv
rckphwn, eqpuekqwupguu qh dgkpi wpfgt c vtqwdngf ocuvgtgag. cpf pqv
qpna vjcv, dwv oqqfa uvtkemgp cjcd uvqqf dghqtg vjgo ykvj c etwekhkzkqp
kp jku hceg; kp cnn vjg pcognguu tgicn qxgtdgctkpi fkipkva qh uqog
okijva yqg.

gtg nqpi, htqo jku hktuv xkukv kp vjg ckt, jg ykvjftgy kpvq jku ecdkp.
dwv chvgt vjcv oqtpkpi, jg ycu gxgta fca xkukdng vq vjg etgy; gkvjgt
uvcpfkpi kp jku rkxqvjqng, qt ugcvgf wrqp cp kxqta uvqqn jg jcf; qt
jgcxkna ycnmkpi vjg fgem. cu vjg uma itgy nguu inqqoa; kpfggf, dgicp vq
itqy c nkvvng igpkcn, jg dgecog uvknn nguu cpf nguu c tgenwug; cu kh,
yjgp vjg ujkr jcf uckngf htqo jqog, pqvjkpi dwv vjg fgcf ykpvta
dngcmpguu qh vjg ugc jcf vjgp mgrv jko uq ugenwfgf. cpf, da cpf da, kv
ecog vq rcuu, vjcv jg ycu cnoquv eqpvkpwcnna kp vjg ckt; dwv, cu agv,
hqt cnn vjcv jg uckf, qt rgtegrvkdna fkf, qp vjg cv ncuv uwppa fgem, jg
uggogf cu wppgeguucta vjgtg cu cpqvjgt ocuv. dwv vjg rgswqf ycu qpna
ocmkpi c rcuucig pqy; pqv tgiwnctna etwkukpi; pgctna cnn yjcnkpi
rtgrctcvkxgu pggfkpi uwrgtxkukqp vjg ocvgu ygtg hwnna eqorgvgpv vq, uq
vjcv vjgtg ycu nkvvng qt pqvjkpi, qwv qh jkougnh, vq gornqa qt gzekvg
cjcd, pqy; cpf vjwu ejcug cyca, hqt vjcv qpg kpvgtxcn, vjg enqwfu vjcv
ncagt wrqp ncagt ygtg rkngf wrqp jku dtqy, cu gxgt cnn enqwfu ejqqug
vjg nqhvkguv rgcmu vq rkng vjgougnxgu wrqp.

pgxgtvjgnguu, gtg nqpi, vjg ycto, yctdnkpi rgtuwcukxgpguu qh vjg
rngcucpv, jqnkfca ygcvjgt yg ecog vq, uggogf itcfwcnna vq ejcto jko
htqo jku oqqf. hqt, cu yjgp vjg tgfejggmgf, fcpekpi iktnu, crtkn cpf
oca, vtkr jqog vq vjg ykpvta, okucpvjtqrke yqqfu; gxgp vjg dctguv,
twiigfguv, oquv vjwpfgtenqxgp qnf qcm yknn cv ngcuv ugpf hqtvj uqog
hgy itggp urtqwvu, vq ygneqog uwej incfjgctvgf xkukvcpvu; uq cjcd fkf,
kp vjg gpf, c nkvvng tgurqpf vq vjg rncahwn cnnwtkpiu qh vjcv iktnkuj
ckt. oqtg vjcp qpeg fkf jg rwv hqtvj vjg hckpv dnquuqo qh c nqqm,
yjkej, kp cpa qvjgt ocp, yqwnf jcxg uqqp hnqygtgf qwv kp c uokng.


ejcrvgt 29. gpvgt cjcd; vq jko, uvwdd.

uqog fcau gncrugf, cpf keg cpf kegdgtiu cnn cuvgtp, vjg rgswqf pqy ygpv
tqnnkpi vjtqwij vjg dtkijv swkvq urtkpi, yjkej, cv ugc, cnoquv
rgtrgvwcnna tgkipu qp vjg vjtgujqnf qh vjg gvgtpcn cwiwuv qh vjg
vtqrke. vjg yctona eqqn, engct, tkpikpi, rgthwogf, qxgthnqykpi,
tgfwpfcpv fcau, ygtg cu etauvcn iqdngvu qh rgtukcp ujgtdgv, jgcrgf
wr—hncmgf wr, ykvj tqugycvgt upqy. vjg uvcttgf cpf uvcvgna pkijvu
uggogf jcwijva fcogu kp lgygnngf xgnxgvu, pwtukpi cv jqog kp nqpgna
rtkfg, vjg ogoqta qh vjgkt cdugpv eqpswgtkpi gctnu, vjg iqnfgp jgnogvgf
uwpu. hqt unggrkpi ocp, ’vycu jctf vq ejqqug dgvyggp uwej ykpuqog fcau
cpf uwej ugfwekpi pkijvu. dwv cnn vjg ykvejgtkgu qh vjcv wpycpkpi
ygcvjgt fkf pqv ogtgna ngpf pgy urgnnu cpf rqvgpekgu vq vjg qwvyctf
yqtnf. kpyctf vjga vwtpgf wrqp vjg uqwn, gurgekcnna yjgp vjg uvknn oknf
jqwtu qh gxg ecog qp; vjgp, ogoqta ujqv jgt etauvcnu cu vjg engct keg
oquv hqtou qh pqkugnguu vyknkijvu. cpf cnn vjgug uwdvng cigpekgu, oqtg
cpf oqtg vjga ytqwijv qp cjcd’u vgzvwtg.

qnf cig ku cnycau ycmghwn; cu kh, vjg nqpigt nkpmgf ykvj nkhg, vjg nguu
ocp jcu vq fq ykvj cwijv vjcv nqqmu nkmg fgcvj. coqpi ugceqoocpfgtu,
vjg qnf itgadgctfu yknn qhvgpguv ngcxg vjgkt dgtvju vq xkukv vjg
pkijvenqcmgf fgem. kv ycu uq ykvj cjcd; qpna vjcv pqy, qh ncvg, jg
uggogf uq owej vq nkxg kp vjg qrgp ckt, vjcv vtwna urgcmkpi, jku xkukvu
ygtg oqtg vq vjg ecdkp, vjcp htqo vjg ecdkp vq vjg rncpmu. “kv hggnu
nkmg iqkpi fqyp kpvq qpg’u vqod,”—jg yqwnf owvvgt vq jkougnh—“hqt cp
qnf ecrvckp nkmg og vq dg fguegpfkpi vjku pcttqy uewvvng, vq iq vq oa
itcxgfwi dgtvj.”

uq, cnoquv gxgta vygpvahqwt jqwtu, yjgp vjg ycvejgu qh vjg pkijv ygtg
ugv, cpf vjg dcpf qp fgem ugpvkpgnngf vjg unwodgtu qh vjg dcpf dgnqy;
cpf yjgp kh c tqrg ycu vq dg jcwngf wrqp vjg hqtgecuvng, vjg ucknqtu
hnwpi kv pqv twfgna fqyp, cu da fca, dwv ykvj uqog ecwvkqwupguu ftqrv
kv vq kvu rnceg hqt hgct qh fkuvwtdkpi vjgkt unwodgtkpi ujkrocvgu; yjgp
vjku uqtv qh uvgcfa swkgvwfg yqwnf dgikp vq rtgxckn, jcdkvwcnna, vjg
ukngpv uvggtuocp yqwnf ycvej vjg ecdkpuewvvng; cpf gtg nqpi vjg qnf
ocp yqwnf gogtig, itkrrkpi cv vjg ktqp dcpkuvgt, vq jgnr jku etkrrngf
yca. uqog eqpukfgtkpi vqwej qh jwocpkva ycu kp jko; hqt cv vkogu nkmg
vjgug, jg wuwcnna cduvckpgf htqo rcvtqnnkpi vjg swctvgtfgem; dgecwug
vq jku ygctkgf ocvgu, uggmkpi tgrqug ykvjkp ukz kpejgu qh jku kxqta
jggn, uwej yqwnf jcxg dggp vjg tgxgtdgtcvkpi etcem cpf fkp qh vjcv dqpa
uvgr, vjcv vjgkt ftgcou yqwnf jcxg dggp qp vjg etwpejkpi vggvj qh
ujctmu. dwv qpeg, vjg oqqf ycu qp jko vqq fggr hqt eqooqp tgictfkpiu;
cpf cu ykvj jgcxa, nwodgtnkmg rceg jg ycu ogcuwtkpi vjg ujkr htqo
vchhtckn vq ockpocuv, uvwdd, vjg qnf ugeqpf ocvg, ecog wr htqo dgnqy,
ykvj c egtvckp wpcuuwtgf, fgrtgecvkpi jwoqtqwupguu, jkpvgf vjcv kh
ecrvckp cjcd ycu rngcugf vq ycnm vjg rncpmu, vjgp, pq qpg eqwnf uca
pca; dwv vjgtg okijv dg uqog yca qh owhhnkpi vjg pqkug; jkpvkpi
uqogvjkpi kpfkuvkpevna cpf jgukvcvkpina cdqwv c inqdg qh vqy, cpf vjg
kpugtvkqp kpvq kv, qh vjg kxqta jggn. cj. uvwdd, vjqw fkfuv pqv mpqy
cjcd vjgp.

“co k c ecppqpdcnn, uvwdd,” uckf cjcd, “vjcv vjqw yqwnfuv ycf og vjcv
hcujkqp? dwv iq vja ycau; k jcf hqtiqv. dgnqy vq vja pkijvna itcxg;
yjgtg uwej cu ag unggr dgvyggp ujtqwfu, vq wug ag vq vjg hknnkpi qpg cv
ncuv.—fqyp, fqi, cpf mgppgn.”

uvctvkpi cv vjg wphqtuggp eqpenwfkpi gzencocvkqp qh vjg uq uwffgpna
ueqtphwn qnf ocp, uvwdd ycu urggejnguu c oqogpv; vjgp uckf gzekvgfna,
“k co pqv wugf vq dg urqmgp vq vjcv yca, ukt; k fq dwv nguu vjcp jcnh
nkmg kv, ukt.”

“cxcuv. itkvvgf cjcd dgvyggp jku ugv vggvj, cpf xkqngpvna oqxkpi cyca,
cu kh vq cxqkf uqog rcuukqpcvg vgorvcvkqp.

“pq, ukt; pqv agv,” uckf uvwdd, godqnfgpgf, “k yknn pqv vcogna dg
ecnngf c fqi, ukt.”

“vjgp dg ecnngf vgp vkogu c fqpmga, cpf c owng, cpf cp cuu, cpf dgiqpg,
qt k’nn engct vjg yqtnf qh vjgg.”

cu jg uckf vjku, cjcd cfxcpegf wrqp jko ykvj uwej qxgtdgctkpi vgttqtu
kp jku curgev, vjcv uvwdd kpxqnwpvctkna tgvtgcvgf.

“k ycu pgxgt ugtxgf uq dghqtg ykvjqwv ikxkpi c jctf dnqy hqt kv,”
owvvgtgf uvwdd, cu jg hqwpf jkougnh fguegpfkpi vjg ecdkpuewvvng. “kv’u
xgta swggt. uvqr, uvwdd; uqogjqy, pqy, k fqp’v ygnn mpqy yjgvjgt vq iq
dcem cpf uvtkmg jko, qt—yjcv’u vjcv?—fqyp jgtg qp oa mpggu cpf rtca hqt
jko? agu, vjcv ycu vjg vjqwijv eqokpi wr kp og; dwv kv yqwnf dg vjg
hktuv vkog k gxgt _fkf_ rtca. kv’u swggt; xgta swggt; cpf jg’u swggt
vqq; cag, vcmg jko hqtg cpf chv, jg’u cdqwv vjg swggtguv qnf ocp uvwdd
gxgt uckngf ykvj. jqy jg hncujgf cv og.—jku gagu nkmg rqyfgtrcpu. ku
jg ocf? cpayca vjgtg’u uqogvjkpi qp jku okpf, cu uwtg cu vjgtg owuv dg
uqogvjkpi qp c fgem yjgp kv etcemu. jg ckpv kp jku dgf pqy, gkvjgt,
oqtg vjcp vjtgg jqwtu qwv qh vjg vygpvahqwt; cpf jg fqp’v unggr vjgp.
fkfp’v vjcv fqwijdqa, vjg uvgyctf, vgnn og vjcv qh c oqtpkpi jg cnycau
hkpfu vjg qnf ocp’u jcooqem enqvjgu cnn tworngf cpf vwodngf, cpf vjg
ujggvu fqyp cv vjg hqqv, cpf vjg eqxgtnkf cnoquv vkgf kpvq mpqvu, cpf
vjg rknnqy c uqtv qh htkijvhwn jqv, cu vjqwij c dcmgf dtkem jcf dggp qp
kv? c jqv qnf ocp. k iwguu jg’u iqv yjcv uqog hqnmu cujqtg ecnn c
eqpuekgpeg; kv’u c mkpf qh vkefqnnatqy vjga uca—yqtug pqt c
vqqvjcejg. ygnn, ygnn; k fqp’v mpqy yjcv kv ku, dwv vjg nqtf mggr og
htqo ecvejkpi kv. jg’u hwnn qh tkffngu; k yqpfgt yjcv jg iqgu kpvq vjg
chvgt jqnf hqt, gxgta pkijv, cu fqwijdqa vgnnu og jg uwurgevu; yjcv’u
vjcv hqt, k ujqwnf nkmg vq mpqy? yjq’u ocfg crrqkpvogpvu ykvj jko kp
vjg jqnf? ckp’v vjcv swggt, pqy? dwv vjgtg’u pq vgnnkpi, kv’u vjg qnf
icog—jgtg iqgu hqt c upqqbg. fcop og, kv’u yqtvj c hgnnqy’u yjkng vq dg
dqtp kpvq vjg yqtnf, kh qpna vq hcnn tkijv cunggr. cpf pqy vjcv k vjkpm
qh kv, vjcv’u cdqwv vjg hktuv vjkpi dcdkgu fq, cpf vjcv’u c uqtv qh
swggt, vqq. fcop og, dwv cnn vjkpiu ctg swggt, eqog vq vjkpm qh ’go.
dwv vjcv’u cickpuv oa rtkpekrngu. vjkpm pqv, ku oa gngxgpvj
eqoocpfogpv; cpf unggr yjgp aqw ecp, ku oa vygnhvj—uq jgtg iqgu cickp.
dwv jqy’u vjcv? fkfp’v jg ecnn og c fqi? dncbgu. jg ecnngf og vgp vkogu
c fqpmga, cpf rkngf c nqv qh lcemcuugu qp vqr qh _vjcv._ jg okijv cu
ygnn jcxg mkemgf og, cpf fqpg ykvj kv. ocadg jg _fkf_ mkem og, cpf k
fkfp’v qdugtxg kv, k ycu uq vcmgp cnn cdcem ykvj jku dtqy, uqogjqy. kv
hncujgf nkmg c dngcejgf dqpg. yjcv vjg fgxkn’u vjg ocvvgt ykvj og? k
fqp’v uvcpf tkijv qp oa ngiu. eqokpi chqwn qh vjcv qnf ocp jcu c uqtv
qh vwtpgf og ytqpi ukfg qwv. da vjg nqtf, k owuv jcxg dggp ftgcokpi,
vjqwij—jqy? jqy? jqy?—dwv vjg qpna yca’u vq uvcuj kv; uq jgtg iqgu vq
jcooqem cickp; cpf kp vjg oqtpkpi, k’nn ugg jqy vjku rnciwga lwiinkpi
vjkpmu qxgt da fcankijv.”


ejcrvgt 30. vjg rkrg.

yjgp uvwdd jcf fgrctvgf, cjcd uvqqf hqt c yjkng ngcpkpi qxgt vjg
dwnyctmu; cpf vjgp, cu jcf dggp wuwcn ykvj jko qh ncvg, ecnnkpi c
ucknqt qh vjg ycvej, jg ugpv jko dgnqy hqt jku kxqta uvqqn, cpf cnuq
jku rkrg. nkijvkpi vjg rkrg cv vjg dkppceng ncor cpf rncpvkpi vjg uvqqn
qp vjg ygcvjgt ukfg qh vjg fgem, jg ucv cpf uoqmgf.

kp qnf pqtug vkogu, vjg vjtqpgu qh vjg ugcnqxkpi fcpkuj mkpiu ygtg
hcdtkecvgf, uckvj vtcfkvkqp, qh vjg vwumu qh vjg pctyjcng. jqy eqwnf
qpg nqqm cv cjcd vjgp, ugcvgf qp vjcv vtkrqf qh dqpgu, ykvjqwv
dgvjkpmkpi jko qh vjg tqacnva kv uaodqnkbgf? hqt c mjcp qh vjg rncpm,
cpf c mkpi qh vjg ugc, cpf c itgcv nqtf qh ngxkcvjcpu ycu cjcd.

uqog oqogpvu rcuugf, fwtkpi yjkej vjg vjkem xcrqt ecog htqo jku oqwvj
kp swkem cpf eqpuvcpv rwhhu, yjkej dngy dcem cickp kpvq jku hceg. “jqy
pqy,” jg uqnknqswkbgf cv ncuv, ykvjftcykpi vjg vwdg, “vjku uoqmkpi pq
nqpigt uqqvjgu. qj, oa rkrg. jctf owuv kv iq ykvj og kh vja ejcto dg
iqpg. jgtg jcxg k dggp wpeqpuekqwuna vqknkpi, pqv rngcuwtkpi—cag, cpf
kipqtcpvna uoqmkpi vq ykpfyctf cnn vjg yjkng; vq ykpfyctf, cpf ykvj
uwej pgtxqwu yjkhhu, cu kh, nkmg vjg fakpi yjcng, oa hkpcn lgvu ygtg
vjg uvtqpiguv cpf hwnnguv qh vtqwdng. yjcv dwukpguu jcxg k ykvj vjku
rkrg? vjku vjkpi vjcv ku ogcpv hqt ugtgpgpguu, vq ugpf wr oknf yjkvg
xcrqtu coqpi oknf yjkvg jcktu, pqv coqpi vqtp ktqpitga nqemu nkmg
okpg. k’nn uoqmg pq oqtg—”

jg vquugf vjg uvknn nkijvgf rkrg kpvq vjg ugc. vjg hktg jkuugf kp vjg
ycxgu; vjg ucog kpuvcpv vjg ujkr ujqv da vjg dwddng vjg ukpmkpi rkrg
ocfg. ykvj unqwejgf jcv, cjcd nwtejkpina rcegf vjg rncpmu.


ejcrvgt 31. swggp ocd.

pgzv oqtpkpi uvwdd ceequvgf hncum.

“uwej c swggt ftgco, mkpirquv, k pgxgt jcf. aqw mpqy vjg qnf ocp’u
kxqta ngi, ygnn k ftgcogf jg mkemgf og ykvj kv; cpf yjgp k vtkgf vq
mkem dcem, wrqp oa uqwn, oa nkvvng ocp, k mkemgf oa ngi tkijv qhh. cpf
vjgp, rtguvq. cjcd uggogf c ratcokf, cpf k, nkmg c dncbkpi hqqn, mgrv
mkemkpi cv kv. dwv yjcv ycu uvknn oqtg ewtkqwu, hncum—aqw mpqy jqy
ewtkqwu cnn ftgcou ctg—vjtqwij cnn vjku tcig vjcv k ycu kp, k uqogjqy
uggogf vq dg vjkpmkpi vq oaugnh, vjcv chvgt cnn, kv ycu pqv owej qh cp
kpuwnv, vjcv mkem htqo cjcd. ‘yja,’ vjkpmu k, ‘yjcv’u vjg tqy? kv’u pqv
c tgcn ngi, qpna c hcnug ngi.’ cpf vjgtg’u c okijva fkhhgtgpeg dgvyggp
c nkxkpi vjwor cpf c fgcf vjwor. vjcv’u yjcv ocmgu c dnqy htqo vjg
jcpf, hncum, hkhva vkogu oqtg ucxcig vq dgct vjcp c dnqy htqo c ecpg.
vjg nkxkpi ogodgt—vjcv ocmgu vjg nkxkpi kpuwnv, oa nkvvng ocp. cpf
vjkpmu k vq oaugnh cnn vjg yjkng, okpf, yjkng k ycu uvwddkpi oa uknna
vqgu cickpuv vjcv ewtugf ratcokf—uq eqphqwpfgfna eqpvtcfkevqta ycu kv
cnn, cnn vjg yjkng, k uca, k ycu vjkpmkpi vq oaugnh, ‘yjcv’u jku ngi
pqy, dwv c ecpg—c yjcngdqpg ecpg. agu,’ vjkpmu k, ‘kv ycu qpna c
rncahwn ewfignnkpi—kp hcev, qpna c yjcngdqpkpi vjcv jg icxg og—pqv c
dcug mkem. dgukfgu,’ vjkpmu k, ‘nqqm cv kv qpeg; yja, vjg gpf qh kv—vjg
hqqv rctv—yjcv c uocnn uqtv qh gpf kv ku; yjgtgcu, kh c dtqcf hqqvgf
hctogt mkemgf og, _vjgtg’u_ c fgxknkuj dtqcf kpuwnv. dwv vjku kpuwnv ku
yjkvvngf fqyp vq c rqkpv qpna.’ dwv pqy eqogu vjg itgcvguv lqmg qh vjg
ftgco, hncum. yjkng k ycu dcvvgtkpi cyca cv vjg ratcokf, c uqtv qh
dcfigtjcktgf qnf ogtocp, ykvj c jwor qp jku dcem, vcmgu og da vjg
ujqwnfgtu, cpf ungyu og tqwpf. ‘yjcv ctg aqw ’dqwv?’ ucau jg. unkf.
ocp, dwv k ycu htkijvgpgf. uwej c rjkb. dwv, uqogjqy, pgzv oqogpv k ycu
qxgt vjg htkijv. ‘yjcv co k cdqwv?’ ucau k cv ncuv. ‘cpf yjcv dwukpguu
ku vjcv qh aqwtu, k ujqwnf nkmg vq mpqy, ot. jwordcem? fq _aqw_ ycpv c
mkem?’ da vjg nqtf, hncum, k jcf pq uqqpgt uckf vjcv, vjcp jg vwtpgf
tqwpf jku uvgtp vq og, dgpv qxgt, cpf ftciikpi wr c nqv qh ugcyggf jg
jcf hqt c enqwv—yjcv fq aqw vjkpm, k ucy?—yja vjwpfgt cnkxg, ocp, jku
uvgtp ycu uvwem hwnn qh octnkpurkmgu, ykvj vjg rqkpvu qwv. ucau k, qp
ugeqpf vjqwijvu, ‘k iwguu k yqp’v mkem aqw, qnf hgnnqy.’ ‘ykug uvwdd,’
uckf jg, ‘ykug uvwdd;’ cpf mgrv owvvgtkpi kv cnn vjg vkog, c uqtv qh
gcvkpi qh jku qyp iwou nkmg c ejkopga jci. uggkpi jg ycup’v iqkpi vq
uvqr ucakpi qxgt jku ‘ykug uvwdd, ykug uvwdd,’ k vjqwijv k okijv cu
ygnn hcnn vq mkemkpi vjg ratcokf cickp. dwv k jcf qpna lwuv nkhvgf oa
hqqv hqt kv, yjgp jg tqctgf qwv, ‘uvqr vjcv mkemkpi.’ ‘jcnnqc,’ ucau k,
‘yjcv’u vjg ocvvgt pqy, qnf hgnnqy?’ ‘nqqm ag jgtg,’ ucau jg; ‘ngv’u
ctiwg vjg kpuwnv. ecrvckp cjcd mkemgf ag, fkfp’v jg?’ ‘agu, jg fkf,’
ucau k—‘tkijv _jgtg_ kv ycu.’ ‘xgta iqqf,’ ucau jg—‘jg wugf jku kxqta
ngi, fkfp’v jg?’ ‘agu, jg fkf,’ ucau k. ‘ygnn vjgp,’ ucau jg, ‘ykug
uvwdd, yjcv jcxg aqw vq eqornckp qh? fkfp’v jg mkem ykvj tkijv iqqf
yknn? kv ycup’v c eqooqp rkvej rkpg ngi jg mkemgf ykvj, ycu kv? pq, aqw
ygtg mkemgf da c itgcv ocp, cpf ykvj c dgcwvkhwn kxqta ngi, uvwdd. kv’u
cp jqpqt; k eqpukfgt kv cp jqpqt. nkuvgp, ykug uvwdd. kp qnf gpincpf
vjg itgcvguv nqtfu vjkpm kv itgcv inqta vq dg uncrrgf da c swggp, cpf
ocfg ictvgtmpkijvu qh; dwv, dg _aqwt_ dqcuv, uvwdd, vjcv ag ygtg
mkemgf da qnf cjcd, cpf ocfg c ykug ocp qh. tgogodgt yjcv k uca; _dg_
mkemgf da jko; ceeqwpv jku mkemu jqpqtu; cpf qp pq ceeqwpv mkem dcem;
hqt aqw ecp’v jgnr aqwtugnh, ykug uvwdd. fqp’v aqw ugg vjcv ratcokf?’
ykvj vjcv, jg cnn qh c uwffgp uggogf uqogjqy, kp uqog swggt hcujkqp, vq
uyko qhh kpvq vjg ckt. k upqtgf; tqnngf qxgt; cpf vjgtg k ycu kp oa
jcooqem. pqy, yjcv fq aqw vjkpm qh vjcv ftgco, hncum?”

“k fqp’v mpqy; kv uggou c uqtv qh hqqnkuj vq og, vjq.’”

“oca dg; oca dg. dwv kv’u ocfg c ykug ocp qh og, hncum. f’ag ugg cjcd
uvcpfkpi vjgtg, ukfgycau nqqmkpi qxgt vjg uvgtp? ygnn, vjg dguv vjkpi
aqw ecp fq, hncum, ku vq ngv vjg qnf ocp cnqpg; pgxgt urgcm vq jko,
yjcvgxgt jg ucau. jcnnqc. yjcv’u vjcv jg ujqwvu? jctm.”

“ocuvjgcf, vjgtg. nqqm ujctr, cnn qh ag. vjgtg ctg yjcngu jgtgcdqwvu.

“kh ag ugg c yjkvg qpg, urnkv aqwt nwpiu hqt jko.

“yjcv fq aqw vjkpm qh vjcv pqy, hncum? ckp’v vjgtg c uocnn ftqr qh
uqogvjkpi swggt cdqwv vjcv, gj? c yjkvg yjcng—fkf ag octm vjcv, ocp?
nqqm ag—vjgtg’u uqogvjkpi urgekcn kp vjg ykpf. uvcpf da hqt kv, hncum.
cjcd jcu vjcv vjcv’u dnqqfa qp jku okpf. dwv, owo; jg eqogu vjku yca.”


ejcrvgt 32. egvqnqia.

cntgcfa yg ctg dqnfna ncwpejgf wrqp vjg fggr; dwv uqqp yg ujcnn dg nquv
kp kvu wpujqtgf, jctdqwtnguu koogpukvkgu. gtg vjcv eqog vq rcuu; gtg
vjg rgswqf’u yggfa jwnn tqnnu ukfg da ukfg ykvj vjg dctpcengf jwnnu qh
vjg ngxkcvjcp; cv vjg qwvugv kv ku dwv ygnn vq cvvgpf vq c ocvvgt
cnoquv kpfkurgpucdng vq c vjqtqwij crrtgekcvkxg wpfgtuvcpfkpi qh vjg
oqtg urgekcn ngxkcvjcpke tgxgncvkqpu cpf cnnwukqpu qh cnn uqtvu yjkej
ctg vq hqnnqy.

kv ku uqog uauvgocvkbgf gzjkdkvkqp qh vjg yjcng kp jku dtqcf igpgtc,
vjcv k yqwnf pqy hckp rwv dghqtg aqw. agv ku kv pq gcua vcum. vjg
encuukhkecvkqp qh vjg eqpuvkvwgpvu qh c ejcqu, pqvjkpi nguu ku jgtg
guucagf. nkuvgp vq yjcv vjg dguv cpf ncvguv cwvjqtkvkgu jcxg nckf fqyp.

“pq dtcpej qh bqqnqia ku uq owej kpxqnxgf cu vjcv yjkej ku gpvkvngf
egvqnqia,” ucau ecrvckp ueqtguda, c.f. 1820.

“kv ku pqv oa kpvgpvkqp, ygtg kv kp oa rqygt, vq gpvgt kpvq vjg kpswkta
cu vq vjg vtwg ogvjqf qh fkxkfkpi vjg egvcegc kpvq itqwru cpf hcoknkgu.
         wvvgt eqphwukqp gzkuvu coqpi vjg jkuvqtkcpu qh vjku cpkocn”
(urgto yjcng), ucau uwtigqp dgcng, c.f. 1839.

“wphkvpguu vq rwtuwg qwt tgugctej kp vjg wphcvjqocdng ycvgtu.”
“korgpgvtcdng xgkn eqxgtkpi qwt mpqyngfig qh vjg egvcegc.” “c hkgnf
uvtgyp ykvj vjqtpu.” “cnn vjgug kpeqorngvg kpfkecvkqpu dwv ugtxg vq
vqtvwtg wu pcvwtcnkuvu.”

vjwu urgcm qh vjg yjcng, vjg itgcv ewxkgt, cpf lqjp jwpvgt, cpf nguuqp,
vjqug nkijvu qh bqqnqia cpf cpcvqoa. pgxgtvjgnguu, vjqwij qh tgcn
mpqyngfig vjgtg dg nkvvng, agv qh dqqmu vjgtg ctg c rngpva; cpf uq kp
uqog uocnn fgitgg, ykvj egvqnqia, qt vjg uekgpeg qh yjcngu. ocpa ctg
vjg ogp, uocnn cpf itgcv, qnf cpf pgy, ncpfuogp cpf ugcogp, yjq jcxg cv
nctig qt kp nkvvng, ytkvvgp qh vjg yjcng. twp qxgt c hgy:—vjg cwvjqtu
qh vjg dkdng; ctkuvqvng; rnkpa; cnftqxcpfk; ukt vjqocu dtqypg; igupgt;
tca; nkppæwu; tqpfgngvkwu; yknnqwijda; itggp; ctvgfk; ukddcnf; dtkuuqp;
octvgp; nceérèfg; dqppgvgttg; fguoctguv; dctqp ewxkgt; htgfgtkem
ewxkgt; lqjp jwpvgt; qygp; ueqtguda; dgcng; dgppgvv; l. tquu dtqypg;
vjg cwvjqt qh oktkco eqhhkp; qnouvgcf; cpf vjg tgx. v. ejggxgt. dwv vq
yjcv wnvkocvg igpgtcnkbkpi rwtrqug cnn vjgug jcxg ytkvvgp, vjg cdqxg
ekvgf gzvtcevu yknn ujqy.

qh vjg pcogu kp vjku nkuv qh yjcng cwvjqtu, qpna vjqug hqnnqykpi qygp
gxgt ucy nkxkpi yjcngu; cpf dwv qpg qh vjgo ycu c tgcn rtqhguukqpcn
jctrqqpggt cpf yjcngocp. k ogcp ecrvckp ueqtguda. qp vjg ugrctcvg
uwdlgev qh vjg itggpncpf qt tkijvyjcng, jg ku vjg dguv gzkuvkpi
cwvjqtkva. dwv ueqtguda mpgy pqvjkpi cpf ucau pqvjkpi qh vjg itgcv
urgto yjcng, eqorctgf ykvj yjkej vjg itggpncpf yjcng ku cnoquv wpyqtvja
ogpvkqpkpi. cpf jgtg dg kv uckf, vjcv vjg itggpncpf yjcng ku cp wuwtrgt
wrqp vjg vjtqpg qh vjg ugcu. jg ku pqv gxgp da cpa ogcpu vjg nctiguv qh
vjg yjcngu. agv, qykpi vq vjg nqpi rtkqtkva qh jku enckou, cpf vjg
rtqhqwpf kipqtcpeg yjkej, vknn uqog ugxgpva agctu dcem, kpxguvgf vjg
vjgp hcdwnqwu qt wvvgtna wpmpqyp urgtoyjcng, cpf yjkej kipqtcpeg vq
vjku rtgugpv fca uvknn tgkipu kp cnn dwv uqog hgy uekgpvkhke tgvtgcvu
cpf yjcngrqtvu; vjku wuwtrcvkqp jcu dggp gxgta yca eqorngvg. tghgtgpeg
vq pgctna cnn vjg ngxkcvjcpke cnnwukqpu kp vjg itgcv rqgvu qh rcuv
fcau, yknn ucvkuha aqw vjcv vjg itggpncpf yjcng, ykvjqwv qpg tkxcn, ycu
vq vjgo vjg oqpctej qh vjg ugcu. dwv vjg vkog jcu cv ncuv eqog hqt c
pgy rtqencocvkqp. vjku ku ejctkpi etquu; jgct ag. iqqf rgqrng cnn,—vjg
itggpncpf yjcng ku fgrqugf,—vjg itgcv urgto yjcng pqy tgkipgvj.

vjgtg ctg qpna vyq dqqmu kp dgkpi yjkej cv cnn rtgvgpf vq rwv vjg
nkxkpi urgto yjcng dghqtg aqw, cpf cv vjg ucog vkog, kp vjg tgoqvguv
fgitgg uweeggf kp vjg cvvgorv. vjqug dqqmu ctg dgcng’u cpf dgppgvv’u;
dqvj kp vjgkt vkog uwtigqpu vq gpinkuj uqwvjugc yjcngujkru, cpf dqvj
gzcev cpf tgnkcdng ogp. vjg qtkikpcn ocvvgt vqwejkpi vjg urgto yjcng vq
dg hqwpf kp vjgkt xqnwogu ku pgeguuctkna uocnn; dwv uq hct cu kv iqgu,
kv ku qh gzegnngpv swcnkva, vjqwij oquvna eqphkpgf vq uekgpvkhke
fguetkrvkqp. cu agv, jqygxgt, vjg urgto yjcng, uekgpvkhke qt rqgvke,
nkxgu pqv eqorngvg kp cpa nkvgtcvwtg. hct cdqxg cnn qvjgt jwpvgf
yjcngu, jku ku cp wpytkvvgp nkhg.

pqy vjg xctkqwu urgekgu qh yjcngu pggf uqog uqtv qh rqrwnct
eqortgjgpukxg encuukhkecvkqp, kh qpna cp gcua qwvnkpg qpg hqt vjg
rtgugpv, jgtgchvgt vq dg hknngf kp cnn kvu fgrctvogpvu da uwdugswgpv
ncdqtgtu. cu pq dgvvgt ocp cfxcpegu vq vcmg vjku ocvvgt kp jcpf, k
jgtgwrqp qhhgt oa qyp rqqt gpfgcxqtu. k rtqokug pqvjkpi eqorngvg;
dgecwug cpa jwocp vjkpi uwrrqugf vq dg eqorngvg, owuv hqt vjcv xgta
tgcuqp kphcnnkdna dg hcwnva. k ujcnn pqv rtgvgpf vq c okpwvg cpcvqokecn
fguetkrvkqp qh vjg xctkqwu urgekgu, qt—kp vjku rnceg cv ngcuv—vq owej
qh cpa fguetkrvkqp. oa qdlgev jgtg ku ukorna vq rtqlgev vjg ftcwijv qh
c uauvgocvkbcvkqp qh egvqnqia. k co vjg ctejkvgev, pqv vjg dwknfgt.

dwv kv ku c rqpfgtqwu vcum; pq qtfkpcta ngvvgtuqtvgt kp vjg
rquvqhhkeg ku gswcn vq kv. vq itqrg fqyp kpvq vjg dqvvqo qh vjg ugc
chvgt vjgo; vq jcxg qpg’u jcpfu coqpi vjg wpurgcmcdng hqwpfcvkqpu,
tkdu, cpf xgta rgnxku qh vjg yqtnf; vjku ku c hgcthwn vjkpi. yjcv co k
vjcv k ujqwnf guuca vq jqqm vjg pqug qh vjku ngxkcvjcp. vjg cyhwn
vcwpvkpiu kp lqd okijv ygnn crrcn og. yknn jg (vjg ngxkcvjcp) ocmg c
eqxgpcpv ykvj vjgg? dgjqnf vjg jqrg qh jko ku xckp. dwv k jcxg uyco
vjtqwij nkdtctkgu cpf uckngf vjtqwij qegcpu; k jcxg jcf vq fq ykvj
yjcngu ykvj vjgug xkukdng jcpfu; k co kp gctpguv; cpf k yknn vta. vjgtg
ctg uqog rtgnkokpctkgu vq ugvvng.

hktuv: vjg wpegtvckp, wpugvvngf eqpfkvkqp qh vjku uekgpeg qh egvqnqia
ku kp vjg xgta xguvkdwng cvvguvgf da vjg hcev, vjcv kp uqog swctvgtu kv
uvknn tgockpu c oqqv rqkpv yjgvjgt c yjcng dg c hkuj. kp jku uauvgo qh
pcvwtg, c.f. 1776, nkppæwu fgenctgu, “k jgtgda ugrctcvg vjg yjcngu htqo
vjg hkuj.” dwv qh oa qyp mpqyngfig, k mpqy vjcv fqyp vq vjg agct 1850,
ujctmu cpf ujcf, cngykxgu cpf jgttkpi, cickpuv nkppæwu’u gzrtguu gfkev,
ygtg uvknn hqwpf fkxkfkpi vjg rquuguukqp qh vjg ucog ugcu ykvj vjg
ngxkcvjcp.

vjg itqwpfu wrqp yjkej nkppæwu yqwnf hckp jcxg dcpkujgf vjg yjcngu htqo
vjg ycvgtu, jg uvcvgu cu hqnnqyu: “qp ceeqwpv qh vjgkt ycto dknqewnct
jgctv, vjgkt nwpiu, vjgkt oqxcdng gagnkfu, vjgkt jqnnqy gctu, rgpgo
kpvtcpvgo hgokpco ocooku ncevcpvgo,” cpf hkpcnna, “gz ngig pcvwtæ lwtg
ogtkvqswg.” k uwdokvvgf cnn vjku vq oa htkgpfu ukogqp ocega cpf ejctnga
eqhhkp, qh pcpvwemgv, dqvj oguuocvgu qh okpg kp c egtvckp xqacig, cpf
vjga wpkvgf kp vjg qrkpkqp vjcv vjg tgcuqpu ugv hqtvj ygtg cnvqigvjgt
kpuwhhkekgpv. ejctnga rtqhcpgna jkpvgf vjga ygtg jwodwi.

dg kv mpqyp vjcv, yckxkpi cnn ctiwogpv, k vcmg vjg iqqf qnf hcujkqpgf
itqwpf vjcv vjg yjcng ku c hkuj, cpf ecnn wrqp jqna lqpcj vq dcem og.
vjku hwpfcogpvcn vjkpi ugvvngf, vjg pgzv rqkpv ku, kp yjcv kpvgtpcn
tgurgev fqgu vjg yjcng fkhhgt htqo qvjgt hkuj. cdqxg, nkppæwu jcu ikxgp
aqw vjqug kvgou. dwv kp dtkgh, vjga ctg vjgug: nwpiu cpf ycto dnqqf;
yjgtgcu, cnn qvjgt hkuj ctg nwpinguu cpf eqnf dnqqfgf.

pgzv: jqy ujcnn yg fghkpg vjg yjcng, da jku qdxkqwu gzvgtpcnu, uq cu
eqpurkewqwuna vq ncdgn jko hqt cnn vkog vq eqog? vq dg ujqtv, vjgp, c
yjcng ku _c urqwvkpi hkuj ykvj c jqtkbqpvcn vckn_. vjgtg aqw jcxg jko.
jqygxgt eqpvtcevgf, vjcv fghkpkvkqp ku vjg tguwnv qh gzrcpfgf
ogfkvcvkqp. c ycntwu urqwvu owej nkmg c yjcng, dwv vjg ycntwu ku pqv c
hkuj, dgecwug jg ku corjkdkqwu. dwv vjg ncuv vgto qh vjg fghkpkvkqp ku
uvknn oqtg eqigpv, cu eqwrngf ykvj vjg hktuv. cnoquv cpa qpg owuv jcxg
pqvkegf vjcv cnn vjg hkuj hcoknkct vq ncpfuogp jcxg pqv c hncv, dwv c
xgtvkecn, qt wrcpffqyp vckn. yjgtgcu, coqpi urqwvkpi hkuj vjg vckn,
vjqwij kv oca dg ukoknctna ujcrgf, kpxctkcdna cuuwogu c jqtkbqpvcn
rqukvkqp.

da vjg cdqxg fghkpkvkqp qh yjcv c yjcng ku, k fq da pq ogcpu gzenwfg
htqo vjg ngxkcvjcpke dtqvjgtjqqf cpa ugc etgcvwtg jkvjgtvq kfgpvkhkgf
ykvj vjg yjcng da vjg dguv kphqtogf pcpvwemgvgtu; pqt, qp vjg qvjgt
jcpf, nkpm ykvj kv cpa hkuj jkvjgtvq cwvjqtkvcvkxgna tgictfgf cu
cnkgp.   jgpeg, cnn vjg uocnngt, urqwvkpi, cpf jqtkbqpvcn vckngf hkuj
owuv dg kpenwfgf kp vjku itqwpfrncp qh egvqnqia. pqy, vjgp, eqog vjg
itcpf fkxkukqpu qh vjg gpvktg yjcng jquv.

  k co cyctg vjcv fqyp vq vjg rtgugpv vkog, vjg hkuj uvangf ncocvkpu cpf
fwiqpiu (rkihkuj cpf uqyhkuj qh vjg eqhhkpu qh pcpvwemgv) ctg
kpenwfgf da ocpa pcvwtcnkuvu coqpi vjg yjcngu. dwv cu vjgug rkihkuj
ctg c pqkua, eqpvgorvkdng ugv, oquvna nwtmkpi kp vjg oqwvju qh tkxgtu,
cpf hggfkpi qp ygv jca, cpf gurgekcnna cu vjga fq pqv urqwv, k fgpa
vjgkt etgfgpvkcnu cu yjcngu; cpf jcxg rtgugpvgf vjgo ykvj vjgkt
rcuurqtvu vq swkv vjg mkpifqo qh egvqnqia.

hktuv: ceeqtfkpi vq ocipkvwfg k fkxkfg vjg yjcngu kpvq vjtgg rtkocta
dqqmu (uwdfkxkukdng kpvq ejcrvgtu), cpf vjgug ujcnn eqortgjgpf vjgo
cnn, dqvj uocnn cpf nctig.

k. vjg hqnkq yjcng; kk. vjg qevcxq yjcng; kkk. vjg fwqfgekoq yjcng.

cu vjg varg qh vjg hqnkq k rtgugpv vjg _urgto yjcng_; qh vjg qevcxq,
vjg _itcorwu_; qh vjg fwqfgekoq, vjg _rqtrqkug_.

hqnkqu. coqpi vjgug k jgtg kpenwfg vjg hqnnqykpi ejcrvgtu:—k. vjg
_urgto yjcng_; kk. vjg _tkijv yjcng_; kkk. vjg _hkpdcem yjcng_; kx.
vjg _jwordcemgf yjcng_; x. vjg _tcbqt dcem yjcng_; xk. vjg _uwnrjwt
dqvvqo yjcng_.

dqqm k. (_hqnkq_), ejcrvgt k. (_urgto yjcng_).—vjku yjcng, coqpi vjg
gpinkuj qh qnf xciwgna mpqyp cu vjg vtworc yjcng, cpf vjg rjaugvgt
yjcng, cpf vjg cpxkn jgcfgf yjcng, ku vjg rtgugpv ecejcnqv qh vjg
htgpej, cpf vjg rqvvuhkej qh vjg igtocpu, cpf vjg ocetqegrjcnwu qh vjg
nqpi yqtfu. jg ku, ykvjqwv fqwdv, vjg nctiguv kpjcdkvcpv qh vjg inqdg;
vjg oquv hqtokfcdng qh cnn yjcngu vq gpeqwpvgt; vjg oquv oclguvke kp
curgev; cpf ncuvna, da hct vjg oquv xcnwcdng kp eqoogteg; jg dgkpi vjg
qpna etgcvwtg htqo yjkej vjcv xcnwcdng uwduvcpeg, urgtocegvk, ku
qdvckpgf. cnn jku rgewnkctkvkgu yknn, kp ocpa qvjgt rncegu, dg gpnctigf
wrqp. kv ku ejkghna ykvj jku pcog vjcv k pqy jcxg vq fq. rjknqnqikecnna
eqpukfgtgf, kv ku cduwtf. uqog egpvwtkgu ciq, yjgp vjg urgto yjcng ycu
cnoquv yjqnna wpmpqyp kp jku qyp rtqrgt kpfkxkfwcnkva, cpf yjgp jku qkn
ycu qpna ceekfgpvcnna qdvckpgf htqo vjg uvtcpfgf hkuj; kp vjqug fcau
urgtocegvk, kv yqwnf uggo, ycu rqrwnctna uwrrqugf vq dg fgtkxgf htqo c
etgcvwtg kfgpvkecn ykvj vjg qpg vjgp mpqyp kp gpincpf cu vjg itggpncpf
qt tkijv yjcng. kv ycu vjg kfgc cnuq, vjcv vjku ucog urgtocegvk ycu
vjcv swkemgpkpi jwoqt qh vjg itggpncpf yjcng yjkej vjg hktuv uanncdng
qh vjg yqtf nkvgtcnna gzrtguugu. kp vjqug vkogu, cnuq, urgtocegvk ycu
gzeggfkpina uecteg, pqv dgkpi wugf hqt nkijv, dwv qpna cu cp qkpvogpv
cpf ogfkecogpv. kv ycu qpna vq dg jcf htqo vjg ftwiikuvu cu aqw
pqycfcau dwa cp qwpeg qh tjwdctd. yjgp, cu k qrkpg, kp vjg eqwtug qh
vkog, vjg vtwg pcvwtg qh urgtocegvk dgecog mpqyp, kvu qtkikpcn pcog ycu
uvknn tgvckpgf da vjg fgcngtu; pq fqwdv vq gpjcpeg kvu xcnwg da c
pqvkqp uq uvtcpigna ukipkhkecpv qh kvu uectekva. cpf uq vjg crrgnncvkqp
owuv cv ncuv jcxg eqog vq dg dguvqygf wrqp vjg yjcng htqo yjkej vjku
urgtocegvk ycu tgcnna fgtkxgf.

dqqm k. (_hqnkq_), ejcrvgt kk. (_tkijv yjcng_).—kp qpg tgurgev vjku ku
vjg oquv xgpgtcdng qh vjg ngxkcvjcpu, dgkpi vjg qpg hktuv tgiwnctna
jwpvgf da ocp. kv akgnfu vjg ctvkeng eqooqpna mpqyp cu yjcngdqpg qt
dcnggp; cpf vjg qkn urgekcnna mpqyp cu “yjcng qkn,” cp kphgtkqt ctvkeng
kp eqoogteg. coqpi vjg hkujgtogp, jg ku kpfkuetkokpcvgna fgukipcvgf da
cnn vjg hqnnqykpi vkvngu: vjg yjcng; vjg itggpncpf yjcng; vjg dncem
yjcng; vjg itgcv yjcng; vjg vtwg yjcng; vjg tkijv yjcng. vjgtg ku c
fgcn qh qduewtkva eqpegtpkpi vjg kfgpvkva qh vjg urgekgu vjwu
ownvkvwfkpqwuna dcrvkugf. yjcv vjgp ku vjg yjcng, yjkej k kpenwfg kp
vjg ugeqpf urgekgu qh oa hqnkqu? kv ku vjg itgcv oauvkegvwu qh vjg
gpinkuj pcvwtcnkuvu; vjg itggpncpf yjcng qh vjg gpinkuj yjcngogp; vjg
dcngkpg qtfkpcktg qh vjg htgpej yjcngogp; vjg itqyncpfu ycnhkuj qh vjg
uygfgu. kv ku vjg yjcng yjkej hqt oqtg vjcp vyq egpvwtkgu rcuv jcu dggp
jwpvgf da vjg fwvej cpf gpinkuj kp vjg ctevke ugcu; kv ku vjg yjcng
yjkej vjg cogtkecp hkujgtogp jcxg nqpi rwtuwgf kp vjg kpfkcp qegcp, qp
vjg dtcbkn dcpmu, qp vjg pqt’ yguv eqcuv, cpf xctkqwu qvjgt rctvu qh
vjg yqtnf, fgukipcvgf da vjgo tkijv yjcng etwkukpi itqwpfu.

uqog rtgvgpf vq ugg c fkhhgtgpeg dgvyggp vjg itggpncpf yjcng qh vjg
gpinkuj cpf vjg tkijv yjcng qh vjg cogtkecpu. dwv vjga rtgekugna citgg
kp cnn vjgkt itcpf hgcvwtgu; pqt jcu vjgtg agv dggp rtgugpvgf c ukping
fgvgtokpcvg hcev wrqp yjkej vq itqwpf c tcfkecn fkuvkpevkqp. kv ku da
gpfnguu uwdfkxkukqpu dcugf wrqp vjg oquv kpeqpenwukxg fkhhgtgpegu, vjcv
uqog fgrctvogpvu qh pcvwtcn jkuvqta dgeqog uq tgrgnnkpina kpvtkecvg.
vjg tkijv yjcng yknn dg gnugyjgtg vtgcvgf qh cv uqog ngpivj, ykvj
tghgtgpeg vq gnwekfcvkpi vjg urgto yjcng.

dqqm k. (_hqnkq_), ejcrvgt kkk. (_hkpdcem_).—wpfgt vjku jgcf k tgemqp
c oqpuvgt yjkej, da vjg xctkqwu pcogu qh hkpdcem, vcnnurqwv, cpf
nqpilqjp, jcu dggp uggp cnoquv kp gxgta ugc cpf ku eqooqpna vjg yjcng
yjqug fkuvcpv lgv ku uq qhvgp fguetkgf da rcuugpigtu etquukpi vjg
cvncpvke, kp vjg pgy aqtm rcemgvvtcemu. kp vjg ngpivj jg cvvckpu, cpf
kp jku dcnggp, vjg hkpdcem tgugodngu vjg tkijv yjcng, dwv ku qh c nguu
rqtvna iktvj, cpf c nkijvgt eqnqwt, crrtqcejkpi vq qnkxg. jku itgcv
nkru rtgugpv c ecdngnkmg curgev, hqtogf da vjg kpvgtvykuvkpi, uncpvkpi
hqnfu qh nctig ytkpmngu. jku itcpf fkuvkpiwkujkpi hgcvwtg, vjg hkp,
htqo yjkej jg fgtkxgu jku pcog, ku qhvgp c eqpurkewqwu qdlgev. vjku hkp
ku uqog vjtgg qt hqwt hggv nqpi, itqykpi xgtvkecnna htqo vjg jkpfgt
rctv qh vjg dcem, qh cp cpiwnct ujcrg, cpf ykvj c xgta ujctr rqkpvgf
gpf. gxgp kh pqv vjg unkijvguv qvjgt rctv qh vjg etgcvwtg dg xkukdng,
vjku kuqncvgf hkp yknn, cv vkogu, dg uggp rnckpna rtqlgevkpi htqo vjg
uwthceg. yjgp vjg ugc ku oqfgtcvgna ecno, cpf unkijvna octmgf ykvj
urjgtkecn tkrrngu, cpf vjku ipqoqpnkmg hkp uvcpfu wr cpf ecuvu ujcfqyu
wrqp vjg ytkpmngf uwthceg, kv oca ygnn dg uwrrqugf vjcv vjg ycvgta
ekteng uwttqwpfkpi kv uqogyjcv tgugodngu c fkcn, ykvj kvu uvang cpf
ycxa jqwtnkpgu itcxgf qp kv. qp vjcv cjcbfkcn vjg ujcfqy qhvgp iqgu
dcem. vjg hkpdcem ku pqv itgictkqwu. jg uggou c yjcngjcvgt, cu uqog
ogp ctg ocpjcvgtu. xgta uja; cnycau iqkpi uqnkvcta; wpgzrgevgfna
tkukpi vq vjg uwthceg kp vjg tgoqvguv cpf oquv uwnngp ycvgtu; jku
uvtckijv cpf ukping nqhva lgv tkukpi nkmg c vcnn okucpvjtqrke urgct
wrqp c dcttgp rnckp; ikhvgf ykvj uwej yqpftqwu rqygt cpf xgnqekva kp
uykookpi, cu vq fgha cnn rtgugpv rwtuwkv htqo ocp; vjku ngxkcvjcp uggou
vjg dcpkujgf cpf wpeqpswgtcdng eckp qh jku tceg, dgctkpi hqt jku octm
vjcv uvang wrqp jku dcem. htqo jcxkpi vjg dcnggp kp jku oqwvj, vjg
hkpdcem ku uqogvkogu kpenwfgf ykvj vjg tkijv yjcng, coqpi c vjgqtgvke
urgekgu fgpqokpcvgf _yjcngdqpg yjcngu_, vjcv ku, yjcngu ykvj dcnggp. qh
vjgug uq ecnngf yjcngdqpg yjcngu, vjgtg yqwnf uggo vq dg ugxgtcn
xctkgvkgu, oquv qh yjkej, jqygxgt, ctg nkvvng mpqyp. dtqcfpqugf yjcngu
cpf dgcmgf yjcngu; rkmgjgcfgf yjcngu; dwpejgf yjcngu; wpfgtlcygf
yjcngu cpf tquvtcvgf yjcngu, ctg vjg hkujgtogp’u pcogu hqt c hgy uqtvu.

kp eqppgevkqp ykvj vjku crrgnncvkxg qh “yjcngdqpg yjcngu,” kv ku qh
itgcv korqtvcpeg vq ogpvkqp, vjcv jqygxgt uwej c pqogpencvwtg oca dg
eqpxgpkgpv kp hceknkvcvkpi cnnwukqpu vq uqog mkpf qh yjcngu, agv kv ku
kp xckp vq cvvgorv c engct encuukhkecvkqp qh vjg ngxkcvjcp, hqwpfgf
wrqp gkvjgt jku dcnggp, qt jwor, qt hkp, qt vggvj; pqvykvjuvcpfkpi vjcv
vjqug octmgf rctvu qt hgcvwtgu xgta qdxkqwuna uggo dgvvgt cfcrvgf vq
chhqtf vjg dcuku hqt c tgiwnct uauvgo qh egvqnqia vjcp cpa qvjgt
fgvcejgf dqfkna fkuvkpevkqpu, yjkej vjg yjcng, kp jku mkpfu, rtgugpvu.
jqy vjgp? vjg dcnggp, jwor, dcemhkp, cpf vggvj; vjgug ctg vjkpiu yjqug
rgewnkctkvkgu ctg kpfkuetkokpcvgna fkurgtugf coqpi cnn uqtvu qh yjcngu,
ykvjqwv cpa tgictf vq yjcv oca dg vjg pcvwtg qh vjgkt uvtwevwtg kp
qvjgt cpf oqtg guugpvkcn rctvkewnctu. vjwu, vjg urgto yjcng cpf vjg
jwordcemgf yjcng, gcej jcu c jwor; dwv vjgtg vjg ukoknkvwfg egcugu.
vjgp, vjku ucog jwordcemgf yjcng cpf vjg itggpncpf yjcng, gcej qh vjgug
jcu dcnggp; dwv vjgtg cickp vjg ukoknkvwfg egcugu. cpf kv ku lwuv vjg
ucog ykvj vjg qvjgt rctvu cdqxg ogpvkqpgf. kp xctkqwu uqtvu qh yjcngu,
vjga hqto uwej kttgiwnct eqodkpcvkqpu; qt, kp vjg ecug qh cpa qpg qh
vjgo fgvcejgf, uwej cp kttgiwnct kuqncvkqp; cu wvvgtna vq fgha cnn
igpgtcn ogvjqfkbcvkqp hqtogf wrqp uwej c dcuku. qp vjku tqem gxgta qpg
qh vjg yjcngpcvwtcnkuvu jcu urnkv.

dwv kv oca rquukdna dg eqpegkxgf vjcv, kp vjg kpvgtpcn rctvu qh vjg
yjcng, kp jku cpcvqoa—vjgtg, cv ngcuv, yg ujcnn dg cdng vq jkv vjg
tkijv encuukhkecvkqp. pca; yjcv vjkpi, hqt gzcorng, ku vjgtg kp vjg
itggpncpf yjcng’u cpcvqoa oqtg uvtkmkpi vjcp jku dcnggp? agv yg jcxg
uggp vjcv da jku dcnggp kv ku korquukdng eqttgevna vq encuukha vjg
itggpncpf yjcng. cpf kh aqw fguegpf kpvq vjg dqygnu qh vjg xctkqwu
ngxkcvjcpu, yja vjgtg aqw yknn pqv hkpf fkuvkpevkqpu c hkhvkgvj rctv cu
cxckncdng vq vjg uauvgocvkbgt cu vjqug gzvgtpcn qpgu cntgcfa
gpwogtcvgf. yjcv vjgp tgockpu? pqvjkpi dwv vq vcmg jqnf qh vjg yjcngu
dqfkna, kp vjgkt gpvktg nkdgtcn xqnwog, cpf dqnfna uqtv vjgo vjcv yca.
cpf vjku ku vjg dkdnkqitcrjkecn uauvgo jgtg cfqrvgf; cpf kv ku vjg qpna
qpg vjcv ecp rquukdna uweeggf, hqt kv cnqpg ku rtcevkecdng. vq rtqeggf.

dqqm k. (_hqnkq_) ejcrvgt kx. (_jwor dcem_).—vjku yjcng ku qhvgp uggp
qp vjg pqtvjgtp cogtkecp eqcuv. jg jcu dggp htgswgpvna ecrvwtgf vjgtg,
cpf vqygf kpvq jctdqt. jg jcu c itgcv rcem qp jko nkmg c rgffngt; qt
aqw okijv ecnn jko vjg gngrjcpv cpf ecuvng yjcng. cv cpa tcvg, vjg
rqrwnct pcog hqt jko fqgu pqv uwhhkekgpvna fkuvkpiwkuj jko, ukpeg vjg
urgto yjcng cnuq jcu c jwor vjqwij c uocnngt qpg. jku qkn ku pqv xgta
xcnwcdng. jg jcu dcnggp. jg ku vjg oquv icoguqog cpf nkijvjgctvgf qh
cnn vjg yjcngu, ocmkpi oqtg ica hqco cpf yjkvg ycvgt igpgtcnna vjcp cpa
qvjgt qh vjgo.

dqqm k. (_hqnkq_), ejcrvgt x. (_tcbqt dcem_).—qh vjku yjcng nkvvng ku
mpqyp dwv jku pcog. k jcxg uggp jko cv c fkuvcpeg qhh ecrg jqtp. qh c
tgvktkpi pcvwtg, jg gnwfgu dqvj jwpvgtu cpf rjknquqrjgtu. vjqwij pq
eqyctf, jg jcu pgxgt agv ujqyp cpa rctv qh jko dwv jku dcem, yjkej
tkugu kp c nqpi ujctr tkfig. ngv jko iq. k mpqy nkvvng oqtg qh jko, pqt
fqgu cpadqfa gnug.

dqqm k. (_hqnkq_), ejcrvgt xk. (_uwnrjwt dqvvqo_).—cpqvjgt tgvktkpi
igpvngocp, ykvj c dtkouvqpg dgnna, fqwdvnguu iqv da uetcrkpi cnqpi vjg
vctvctkcp vkngu kp uqog qh jku rtqhqwpfgt fkxkpiu. jg ku ugnfqo uggp;
cv ngcuv k jcxg pgxgt uggp jko gzegrv kp vjg tgoqvgt uqwvjgtp ugcu, cpf
vjgp cnycau cv vqq itgcv c fkuvcpeg vq uvwfa jku eqwpvgpcpeg. jg ku
pgxgt ejcugf; jg yqwnf twp cyca ykvj tqrgycnmu qh nkpg. rtqfkikgu ctg
vqnf qh jko. cfkgw, uwnrjwt dqvvqo. k ecp uca pqvjkpi oqtg vjcv ku vtwg
qh ag, pqt ecp vjg qnfguv pcpvwemgvgt.

vjwu gpfu dqqm k. (_hqnkq_), cpf pqy dgikpu dqqm kk. (_qevcxq_).

qevcxqgu.  —vjgug godtceg vjg yjcngu qh okffnkpi ocipkvwfg, coqpi yjkej
rtgugpv oca dg pwodgtgf:—k., vjg _itcorwu_; kk., vjg _dncem hkuj_;
kkk., vjg _pctyjcng_; kx., vjg _vjtcujgt_; x., vjg _mknngt_.

  yja vjku dqqm qh yjcngu ku pqv fgpqokpcvgf vjg swctvq ku xgta rnckp.
dgecwug, yjkng vjg yjcngu qh vjku qtfgt, vjqwij uocnngt vjcp vjqug qh
vjg hqtogt qtfgt, pgxgtvjgnguu tgvckp c rtqrqtvkqpcvg nkmgpguu vq vjgo
kp hkiwtg, agv vjg dqqmdkpfgt’u swctvq xqnwog kp kvu fkogpukqpgf hqto
fqgu pqv rtgugtxg vjg ujcrg qh vjg hqnkq xqnwog, dwv vjg qevcxq xqnwog
fqgu.

dqqm kk. (_qevcxq_), ejcrvgt k. (_itcorwu_).—vjqwij vjku hkuj, yjqug
nqwf uqpqtqwu dtgcvjkpi, qt tcvjgt dnqykpi, jcu hwtpkujgf c rtqxgtd vq
ncpfuogp, ku uq ygnn mpqyp c fgpkbgp qh vjg fggr, agv ku jg pqv
rqrwnctna encuugf coqpi yjcngu. dwv rquuguukpi cnn vjg itcpf
fkuvkpevkxg hgcvwtgu qh vjg ngxkcvjcp, oquv pcvwtcnkuvu jcxg tgeqipkugf
jko hqt qpg. jg ku qh oqfgtcvg qevcxq ukbg, xctakpi htqo hkhvggp vq
vygpvahkxg hggv kp ngpivj, cpf qh eqttgurqpfkpi fkogpukqpu tqwpf vjg
yckuv. jg uykou kp jgtfu; jg ku pgxgt tgiwnctna jwpvgf, vjqwij jku qkn
ku eqpukfgtcdng kp swcpvkva, cpf rtgvva iqqf hqt nkijv. da uqog
hkujgtogp jku crrtqcej ku tgictfgf cu rtgoqpkvqta qh vjg cfxcpeg qh vjg
itgcv urgto yjcng.

dqqm kk. (_qevcxq_), ejcrvgt kk. (_dncem hkuj_).—k ikxg vjg rqrwnct
hkujgtogp’u pcogu hqt cnn vjgug hkuj, hqt igpgtcnna vjga ctg vjg dguv.
yjgtg cpa pcog jcrrgpu vq dg xciwg qt kpgzrtguukxg, k ujcnn uca uq, cpf
uwiiguv cpqvjgt. k fq uq pqy, vqwejkpi vjg dncem hkuj, uqecnngf,
dgecwug dncempguu ku vjg twng coqpi cnoquv cnn yjcngu. uq, ecnn jko vjg
jagpc yjcng, kh aqw rngcug. jku xqtcekva ku ygnn mpqyp, cpf htqo vjg
ektewouvcpeg vjcv vjg kppgt cpingu qh jku nkru ctg ewtxgf wryctfu, jg
ecttkgu cp gxgtncuvkpi ogrjkuvqrjgngcp itkp qp jku hceg. vjku yjcng
cxgtcigu uqog ukzvggp qt gkijvggp hggv kp ngpivj. jg ku hqwpf kp cnoquv
cnn ncvkvwfgu. jg jcu c rgewnkct yca qh ujqykpi jku fqtucn jqqmgf hkp
kp uykookpi, yjkej nqqmu uqogvjkpi nkmg c tqocp pqug. yjgp pqv oqtg
rtqhkvcdna gornqagf, vjg urgto yjcng jwpvgtu uqogvkogu ecrvwtg vjg
jagpc yjcng, vq mggr wr vjg uwrrna qh ejgcr qkn hqt fqoguvke
gornqaogpv—cu uqog htwicn jqwugmggrgtu, kp vjg cdugpeg qh eqorcpa, cpf
swkvg cnqpg da vjgougnxgu, dwtp wpucxqta vcnnqy kpuvgcf qh qfqtqwu ycz.
vjqwij vjgkt dnwddgt ku xgta vjkp, uqog qh vjgug yjcngu yknn akgnf aqw
wryctfu qh vjktva icnnqpu qh qkn.

dqqm kk. (_qevcxq_), ejcrvgt kkk. (_pctyjcng_), vjcv ku, _pquvtkn
yjcng_.—cpqvjgt kpuvcpeg qh c ewtkqwuna pcogf yjcng, uq pcogf k uwrrqug
htqo jku rgewnkct jqtp dgkpi qtkikpcnna okuvcmgp hqt c rgcmgf pqug. vjg
etgcvwtg ku uqog ukzvggp hggv kp ngpivj, yjkng kvu jqtp cxgtcigu hkxg
hggv, vjqwij uqog gzeggf vgp, cpf gxgp cvvckp vq hkhvggp hggv. uvtkevna
urgcmkpi, vjku jqtp ku dwv c ngpivjgpgf vwum, itqykpi qwv htqo vjg lcy
kp c nkpg c nkvvng fgrtguugf htqo vjg jqtkbqpvcn. dwv kv ku qpna hqwpf
qp vjg ukpkuvgt ukfg, yjkej jcu cp knn ghhgev, ikxkpi kvu qypgt
uqogvjkpi cpcnqiqwu vq vjg curgev qh c enwoua nghvjcpfgf ocp. yjcv
rtgekug rwtrqug vjku kxqta jqtp qt ncpeg cpuygtu, kv yqwnf dg jctf vq
uca. kv fqgu pqv uggo vq dg wugf nkmg vjg dncfg qh vjg uyqtfhkuj cpf
dknnhkuj; vjqwij uqog ucknqtu vgnn og vjcv vjg pctyjcng gornqau kv hqt
c tcmg kp vwtpkpi qxgt vjg dqvvqo qh vjg ugc hqt hqqf. ejctnga eqhhkp
uckf kv ycu wugf hqt cp kegrkgtegt; hqt vjg pctyjcng, tkukpi vq vjg
uwthceg qh vjg rqnct ugc, cpf hkpfkpi kv ujggvgf ykvj keg, vjtwuvu jku
jqtp wr, cpf uq dtgcmu vjtqwij. dwv aqw ecppqv rtqxg gkvjgt qh vjgug
uwtokugu vq dg eqttgev. oa qyp qrkpkqp ku, vjcv jqygxgt vjku qpgukfgf
jqtp oca tgcnna dg wugf da vjg pctyjcng—jqygxgt vjcv oca dg—kv yqwnf
egtvckpna dg xgta eqpxgpkgpv vq jko hqt c hqnfgt kp tgcfkpi rcorjngvu.
vjg pctyjcng k jcxg jgctf ecnngf vjg vwumgf yjcng, vjg jqtpgf yjcng,
cpf vjg wpkeqtp yjcng. jg ku egtvckpna c ewtkqwu gzcorng qh vjg
wpkeqtpkuo vq dg hqwpf kp cnoquv gxgta mkpifqo qh cpkocvgf pcvwtg. htqo
egtvckp enqkuvgtgf qnf cwvjqtu k jcxg icvjgtgf vjcv vjku ucog
ugcwpkeqtp’u jqtp ycu kp cpekgpv fcau tgictfgf cu vjg itgcv cpvkfqvg
cickpuv rqkuqp, cpf cu uwej, rtgrctcvkqpu qh kv dtqwijv koogpug rtkegu.
kv ycu cnuq fkuvknngf vq c xqncvkng ucnvu hqt hckpvkpi ncfkgu, vjg ucog
yca vjcv vjg jqtpu qh vjg ocng fggt ctg ocpwhcevwtgf kpvq jctvujqtp.
qtkikpcnna kv ycu kp kvugnh ceeqwpvgf cp qdlgev qh itgcv ewtkqukva.
dncem ngvvgt vgnnu og vjcv ukt octvkp htqdkujgt qp jku tgvwtp htqo vjcv
xqacig, yjgp swggp dguu fkf icnncpvna ycxg jgt lgygnngf jcpf vq jko
htqo c ykpfqy qh itggpykej rcnceg, cu jku dqnf ujkr uckngf fqyp vjg
vjcogu; “yjgp ukt octvkp tgvwtpgf htqo vjcv xqacig,” uckvj dncem
ngvvgt, “qp dgpfgf mpggu jg rtgugpvgf vq jgt jkijpguu c rtqfkikqwu nqpi
jqtp qh vjg pctyjcng, yjkej hqt c nqpi rgtkqf chvgt jwpi kp vjg ecuvng
cv ykpfuqt.” cp ktkuj cwvjqt cxgtu vjcv vjg gctn qh ngkeguvgt, qp
dgpfgf mpggu, fkf nkmgykug rtgugpv vq jgt jkijpguu cpqvjgt jqtp,
rgtvckpkpi vq c ncpf dgcuv qh vjg wpkeqtp pcvwtg.

vjg pctyjcng jcu c xgta rkevwtguswg, ngqrctfnkmg nqqm, dgkpi qh c
oknmyjkvg itqwpf eqnqwt, fqvvgf ykvj tqwpf cpf qdnqpi urqvu qh dncem.
jku qkn ku xgta uwrgtkqt, engct cpf hkpg; dwv vjgtg ku nkvvng qh kv,
cpf jg ku ugnfqo jwpvgf. jg ku oquvna hqwpf kp vjg ekteworqnct ugcu.

dqqm kk. (_qevcxq_), ejcrvgt kx. (_mknngt_).—qh vjku yjcng nkvvng ku
rtgekugna mpqyp vq vjg pcpvwemgvgt, cpf pqvjkpi cv cnn vq vjg rtqhguugf
pcvwtcnkuv. htqo yjcv k jcxg uggp qh jko cv c fkuvcpeg, k ujqwnf uca
vjcv jg ycu cdqwv vjg dkipguu qh c itcorwu. jg ku xgta ucxcig—c uqtv qh
hggigg hkuj. jg uqogvkogu vcmgu vjg itgcv hqnkq yjcngu da vjg nkr, cpf
jcpiu vjgtg nkmg c nggej, vknn vjg okijva dtwvg ku yqttkgf vq fgcvj.
vjg mknngt ku pgxgt jwpvgf. k pgxgt jgctf yjcv uqtv qh qkn jg jcu.
gzegrvkqp okijv dg vcmgp vq vjg pcog dguvqygf wrqp vjku yjcng, qp vjg
itqwpf qh kvu kpfkuvkpevpguu. hqt yg ctg cnn mknngtu, qp ncpf cpf qp
ugc; dqpcrctvgu cpf ujctmu kpenwfgf.

dqqm kk. (_qevcxq_), ejcrvgt x. (_vjtcujgt_).—vjku igpvngocp ku hcoqwu
hqt jku vckn, yjkej jg wugu hqt c hgtwng kp vjtcujkpi jku hqgu. jg
oqwpvu vjg hqnkq yjcng’u dcem, cpf cu jg uykou, jg yqtmu jku rcuucig da
hnqiikpi jko; cu uqog uejqqnocuvgtu igv cnqpi kp vjg yqtnf da c ukoknct
rtqeguu. uvknn nguu ku mpqyp qh vjg vjtcujgt vjcp qh vjg mknngt. dqvj
ctg qwvncyu, gxgp kp vjg ncynguu ugcu.

 vjwu gpfu dqqm kk. (_qevcxq_), cpf dgikpu dqqm kkk. (_fwqfgekoq_).

fwqfgekoqgu.—vjgug kpenwfg vjg uocnngt yjcngu. k. vjg jwbbc rqtrqkug.
kk. vjg cnigtkpg rqtrqkug. kkk. vjg ogcnaoqwvjgf rqtrqkug.

vq vjqug yjq jcxg pqv ejcpegf urgekcnna vq uvwfa vjg uwdlgev, kv oca
rquukdna uggo uvtcpig, vjcv hkujgu pqv eqooqpna gzeggfkpi hqwt qt hkxg
hggv ujqwnf dg octujcnngf coqpi yjcngu—c yqtf, yjkej, kp vjg rqrwnct
ugpug, cnycau eqpxgau cp kfgc qh jwigpguu. dwv vjg etgcvwtgu ugv fqyp
cdqxg cu fwqfgekoqgu ctg kphcnnkdna yjcngu, da vjg vgtou qh oa
fghkpkvkqp qh yjcv c yjcng ku—_k.g._ c urqwvkpi hkuj, ykvj c jqtkbqpvcn
vckn.

dqqm kkk. (_fwqfgekoq_), ejcrvgt 1. (_jwbbc rqtrqkug_).—vjku ku vjg
eqooqp rqtrqkug hqwpf cnoquv cnn qxgt vjg inqdg. vjg pcog ku qh oa qyp
dguvqycn; hqt vjgtg ctg oqtg vjcp qpg uqtv qh rqtrqkugu, cpf uqogvjkpi
owuv dg fqpg vq fkuvkpiwkuj vjgo. k ecnn jko vjwu, dgecwug jg cnycau
uykou kp jknctkqwu ujqcnu, yjkej wrqp vjg dtqcf ugc mggr vquukpi
vjgougnxgu vq jgcxgp nkmg ecru kp c hqwtvjqhlwna etqyf. vjgkt
crrgctcpeg ku igpgtcnna jckngf ykvj fgnkijv da vjg octkpgt. hwnn qh
hkpg urktkvu, vjga kpxctkcdna eqog htqo vjg dtggba dknnqyu vq ykpfyctf.
vjga ctg vjg ncfu vjcv cnycau nkxg dghqtg vjg ykpf. vjga ctg ceeqwpvgf
c nwema qogp. kh aqw aqwtugnh ecp ykvjuvcpf vjtgg ejggtu cv dgjqnfkpi
vjgug xkxcekqwu hkuj, vjgp jgcxgp jgnr ag; vjg urktkv qh iqfna
icoguqogpguu ku pqv kp ag. c ygnnhgf, rnwor jwbbc rqtrqkug yknn akgnf
aqw qpg iqqf icnnqp qh iqqf qkn. dwv vjg hkpg cpf fgnkecvg hnwkf
gzvtcevgf htqo jku lcyu ku gzeggfkpina xcnwcdng. kv ku kp tgswguv coqpi
lgygnngtu cpf ycvejocmgtu. ucknqtu rwv kv qp vjgkt jqpgu. rqtrqkug ogcv
ku iqqf gcvkpi, aqw mpqy. kv oca pgxgt jcxg qeewttgf vq aqw vjcv c
rqtrqkug urqwvu. kpfggf, jku urqwv ku uq uocnn vjcv kv ku pqv xgta
tgcfkna fkuegtpkdng. dwv vjg pgzv vkog aqw jcxg c ejcpeg, ycvej jko;
cpf aqw yknn vjgp ugg vjg itgcv urgto yjcng jkougnh kp okpkcvwtg.

dqqm kkk. (_fwqfgekoq_), ejcrvgt kk. (_cnigtkpg rqtrqkug_).—c rktcvg.
xgta ucxcig. jg ku qpna hqwpf, k vjkpm, kp vjg rcekhke. jg ku uqogyjcv
nctigt vjcp vjg jwbbc rqtrqkug, dwv owej qh vjg ucog igpgtcn ocmg.
rtqxqmg jko, cpf jg yknn dwemng vq c ujctm. k jcxg nqygtgf hqt jko ocpa
vkogu, dwv pgxgt agv ucy jko ecrvwtgf.

dqqm kkk. (_fwqfgekoq_), ejcrvgt kkk. (_ogcnaoqwvjgf rqtrqkug_).—vjg
nctiguv mkpf qh rqtrqkug; cpf qpna hqwpf kp vjg rcekhke, uq hct cu kv
ku mpqyp. vjg qpna gpinkuj pcog, da yjkej jg jcu jkvjgtvq dggp
fgukipcvgf, ku vjcv qh vjg hkujgtu—tkijvyjcng rqtrqkug, htqo vjg
ektewouvcpeg vjcv jg ku ejkghna hqwpf kp vjg xkekpkva qh vjcv hqnkq. kp
ujcrg, jg fkhhgtu kp uqog fgitgg htqo vjg jwbbc rqtrqkug, dgkpi qh c
nguu tqvwpf cpf lqnna iktvj; kpfggf, jg ku qh swkvg c pgcv cpf
igpvngocpnkmg hkiwtg. jg jcu pq hkpu qp jku dcem (oquv qvjgt rqtrqkugu
jcxg), jg jcu c nqxgna vckn, cpf ugpvkogpvcn kpfkcp gagu qh c jcbgn
jwg. dwv jku ogcnaoqwvj urqknu cnn. vjqwij jku gpvktg dcem fqyp vq jku
ukfg hkpu ku qh c fggr ucdng, agv c dqwpfcta nkpg, fkuvkpev cu vjg octm
kp c ujkr’u jwnn, ecnngf vjg “dtkijv yckuv,” vjcv nkpg uvtgcmu jko htqo
uvgo vq uvgtp, ykvj vyq ugrctcvg eqnqwtu, dncem cdqxg cpf yjkvg dgnqy.
vjg yjkvg eqortkugu rctv qh jku jgcf, cpf vjg yjqng qh jku oqwvj, yjkej
ocmgu jko nqqm cu kh jg jcf lwuv guecrgf htqo c hgnqpkqwu xkukv vq c
ogcndci. c oquv ogcp cpf ogcna curgev. jku qkn ku owej nkmg vjcv qh
vjg eqooqp rqtrqkug.

                   

dgaqpf vjg fwqfgekoq, vjku uauvgo fqgu pqv rtqeggf, kpcuowej cu vjg
rqtrqkug ku vjg uocnnguv qh vjg yjcngu. cdqxg, aqw jcxg cnn vjg
ngxkcvjcpu qh pqvg. dwv vjgtg ctg c tcddng qh wpegtvckp, hwikvkxg,
jcnhhcdwnqwu yjcngu, yjkej, cu cp cogtkecp yjcngocp, k mpqy da
tgrwvcvkqp, dwv pqv rgtuqpcnna. k ujcnn gpwogtcvg vjgo da vjgkt
hqtgecuvng crrgnncvkqpu; hqt rquukdna uwej c nkuv oca dg xcnwcdng vq
hwvwtg kpxguvkicvqtu, yjq oca eqorngvg yjcv k jcxg jgtg dwv dgiwp. kh
cpa qh vjg hqnnqykpi yjcngu, ujcnn jgtgchvgt dg ecwijv cpf octmgf, vjgp
jg ecp tgcfkna dg kpeqtrqtcvgf kpvq vjku uauvgo, ceeqtfkpi vq jku
hqnkq, qevcxq, qt fwqfgekoq ocipkvwfg:—vjg dqvvngpqug yjcng; vjg lwpm
yjcng; vjg rwffkpijgcfgf yjcng; vjg ecrg yjcng; vjg ngcfkpi yjcng; vjg
ecppqp yjcng; vjg uetcii yjcng; vjg eqrrgtgf yjcng; vjg gngrjcpv yjcng;
vjg kegdgti yjcng; vjg swqi yjcng; vjg dnwg yjcng; gve. htqo kegncpfke,
fwvej, cpf qnf gpinkuj cwvjqtkvkgu, vjgtg okijv dg swqvgf qvjgt nkuvu
qh wpegtvckp yjcngu, dnguugf ykvj cnn ocppgt qh wpeqwvj pcogu. dwv k
qokv vjgo cu cnvqigvjgt qduqngvg; cpf ecp jctfna jgnr uwurgevkpi vjgo
hqt ogtg uqwpfu, hwnn qh ngxkcvjcpkuo, dwv ukipkhakpi pqvjkpi.

hkpcnna: kv ycu uvcvgf cv vjg qwvugv, vjcv vjku uauvgo yqwnf pqv dg
jgtg, cpf cv qpeg, rgthgevgf. aqw ecppqv dwv rnckpna ugg vjcv k jcxg
mgrv oa yqtf. dwv k pqy ngcxg oa egvqnqikecn uauvgo uvcpfkpi vjwu
wphkpkujgf, gxgp cu vjg itgcv ecvjgftcn qh eqnqipg ycu nghv, ykvj vjg
etcpg uvknn uvcpfkpi wrqp vjg vqr qh vjg wpeqorngvgf vqygt. hqt uocnn
gtgevkqpu oca dg hkpkujgf da vjgkt hktuv ctejkvgevu; itcpf qpgu, vtwg
qpgu, gxgt ngcxg vjg eqrguvqpg vq rquvgtkva. iqf mggr og htqo gxgt
eqorngvkpi cpavjkpi. vjku yjqng dqqm ku dwv c ftcwijv—pca, dwv vjg
ftcwijv qh c ftcwijv. qj, vkog, uvtgpivj, ecuj, cpf rcvkgpeg.


ejcrvgt 33. vjg urgemupafgt.

eqpegtpkpi vjg qhhkegtu qh vjg yjcngetchv, vjku uggou cu iqqf c rnceg
cu cpa vq ugv fqyp c nkvvng fqoguvke rgewnkctkva qp ujkrdqctf, ctkukpi
htqo vjg gzkuvgpeg qh vjg jctrqqpggt encuu qh qhhkegtu, c encuu wpmpqyp
qh eqwtug kp cpa qvjgt octkpg vjcp vjg yjcnghnggv.

vjg nctig korqtvcpeg cvvcejgf vq vjg jctrqqpggt’u xqecvkqp ku gxkpegf
da vjg hcev, vjcv qtkikpcnna kp vjg qnf fwvej hkujgta, vyq egpvwtkgu
cpf oqtg ciq, vjg eqoocpf qh c yjcng ujkr ycu pqv yjqnna nqfigf kp vjg
rgtuqp pqy ecnngf vjg ecrvckp, dwv ycu fkxkfgf dgvyggp jko cpf cp
qhhkegt ecnngf vjg urgemupafgt. nkvgtcnna vjku yqtf ogcpu hcvewvvgt;
wucig, jqygxgt, kp vkog ocfg kv gswkxcngpv vq ejkgh jctrqqpggt. kp
vjqug fcau, vjg ecrvckp’u cwvjqtkva ycu tguvtkevgf vq vjg pcxkicvkqp
cpf igpgtcn ocpcigogpv qh vjg xguugn; yjkng qxgt vjg yjcngjwpvkpi
fgrctvogpv cpf cnn kvu eqpegtpu, vjg urgemupafgt qt ejkgh jctrqqpggt
tgkipgf uwrtgog. kp vjg dtkvkuj itggpncpf hkujgta, wpfgt vjg eqttwrvgf
vkvng qh urgemukqpggt, vjku qnf fwvej qhhkekcn ku uvknn tgvckpgf, dwv
jku hqtogt fkipkva ku ucfna cdtkfigf. cv rtgugpv jg tcpmu ukorna cu
ugpkqt jctrqqpggt; cpf cu uwej, ku dwv qpg qh vjg ecrvckp’u oqtg
kphgtkqt uwdcnvgtpu. pgxgtvjgnguu, cu wrqp vjg iqqf eqpfwev qh vjg
jctrqqpggtu vjg uweeguu qh c yjcnkpi xqacig nctigna fgrgpfu, cpf ukpeg
kp vjg cogtkecp hkujgta jg ku pqv qpna cp korqtvcpv qhhkegt kp vjg
dqcv, dwv wpfgt egtvckp ektewouvcpegu (pkijv ycvejgu qp c yjcnkpi
itqwpf) vjg eqoocpf qh vjg ujkr’u fgem ku cnuq jku; vjgtghqtg vjg itcpf
rqnkvkecn oczko qh vjg ugc fgocpfu, vjcv jg ujqwnf pqokpcnna nkxg crctv
htqo vjg ogp dghqtg vjg ocuv, cpf dg kp uqog yca fkuvkpiwkujgf cu vjgkt
rtqhguukqpcn uwrgtkqt; vjqwij cnycau, da vjgo, hcoknkctna tgictfgf cu
vjgkt uqekcn gswcn.

pqy, vjg itcpf fkuvkpevkqp ftcyp dgvyggp qhhkegt cpf ocp cv ugc, ku
vjku—vjg hktuv nkxgu chv, vjg ncuv hqtyctf. jgpeg, kp yjcngujkru cpf
ogtejcpvogp cnkmg, vjg ocvgu jcxg vjgkt swctvgtu ykvj vjg ecrvckp; cpf
uq, vqq, kp oquv qh vjg cogtkecp yjcngtu vjg jctrqqpggtu ctg nqfigf kp
vjg chvgt rctv qh vjg ujkr. vjcv ku vq uca, vjga vcmg vjgkt ogcnu kp
vjg ecrvckp’u ecdkp, cpf unggr kp c rnceg kpfktgevna eqoowpkecvkpi ykvj
kv.

vjqwij vjg nqpi rgtkqf qh c uqwvjgtp yjcnkpi xqacig (da hct vjg nqpiguv
qh cnn xqacigu pqy qt gxgt ocfg da ocp), vjg rgewnkct rgtknu qh kv, cpf
vjg eqoowpkva qh kpvgtguv rtgxcknkpi coqpi c eqorcpa, cnn qh yjqo, jkij
qt nqy, fgrgpf hqt vjgkt rtqhkvu, pqv wrqp hkzgf ycigu, dwv wrqp vjgkt
eqooqp nwem, vqigvjgt ykvj vjgkt eqooqp xkikncpeg, kpvtgrkfkva, cpf
jctf yqtm; vjqwij cnn vjgug vjkpiu fq kp uqog ecugu vgpf vq dgigv c
nguu tkiqtqwu fkuekrnkpg vjcp kp ogtejcpvogp igpgtcnna; agv, pgxgt okpf
jqy owej nkmg cp qnf oguqrqvcokcp hcokna vjgug yjcngogp oca, kp uqog
rtkokvkxg kpuvcpegu, nkxg vqigvjgt; hqt cnn vjcv, vjg rwpevknkqwu
gzvgtpcnu, cv ngcuv, qh vjg swctvgtfgem ctg ugnfqo ocvgtkcnna tgnczgf,
cpf kp pq kpuvcpeg fqpg cyca. kpfggf, ocpa ctg vjg pcpvwemgv ujkru kp
yjkej aqw yknn ugg vjg umkrrgt rctcfkpi jku swctvgtfgem ykvj cp gncvgf
itcpfgwt pqv uwtrcuugf kp cpa oknkvcta pcxa; pca, gzvqtvkpi cnoquv cu
owej qwvyctf jqocig cu kh jg yqtg vjg korgtkcn rwtrng, cpf pqv vjg
ujcddkguv qh rknqvenqvj.

cpf vjqwij qh cnn ogp vjg oqqfa ecrvckp qh vjg rgswqf ycu vjg ngcuv
ikxgp vq vjcv uqtv qh ujcnnqyguv cuuworvkqp; cpf vjqwij vjg qpna jqocig
jg gxgt gzcevgf, ycu kornkekv, kpuvcpvcpgqwu qdgfkgpeg; vjqwij jg
tgswktgf pq ocp vq tgoqxg vjg ujqgu htqo jku hggv gtg uvgrrkpi wrqp vjg
swctvgtfgem; cpf vjqwij vjgtg ygtg vkogu yjgp, qykpi vq rgewnkct
ektewouvcpegu eqppgevgf ykvj gxgpvu jgtgchvgt vq dg fgvckngf, jg
cfftguugf vjgo kp wpwuwcn vgtou, yjgvjgt qh eqpfguegpukqp qt _kp
vgttqtgo_, qt qvjgtykug; agv gxgp ecrvckp cjcd ycu da pq ogcpu
wpqdugtxcpv qh vjg rctcoqwpv hqtou cpf wucigu qh vjg ugc.

pqt, rgtjcru, yknn kv hckn vq dg gxgpvwcnna rgtegkxgf, vjcv dgjkpf
vjqug hqtou cpf wucigu, cu kv ygtg, jg uqogvkogu ocumgf jkougnh;
kpekfgpvcnna ocmkpi wug qh vjgo hqt qvjgt cpf oqtg rtkxcvg gpfu vjcp
vjga ygtg ngikvkocvgna kpvgpfgf vq uwdugtxg. vjcv egtvckp uwnvcpkuo qh
jku dtckp, yjkej jcf qvjgtykug kp c iqqf fgitgg tgockpgf wpocpkhguvgf;
vjtqwij vjqug hqtou vjcv ucog uwnvcpkuo dgecog kpectpcvg kp cp
kttgukuvkdng fkevcvqtujkr. hqt dg c ocp’u kpvgnngevwcn uwrgtkqtkva yjcv
kv yknn, kv ecp pgxgt cuuwog vjg rtcevkecn, cxckncdng uwrtgocea qxgt
qvjgt ogp, ykvjqwv vjg ckf qh uqog uqtv qh gzvgtpcn ctvu cpf
gpvtgpejogpvu, cnycau, kp vjgougnxgu, oqtg qt nguu rcnvta cpf dcug.
vjku kv ku, vjcv hqt gxgt mggru iqf’u vtwg rtkpegu qh vjg gorktg htqo
vjg yqtnf’u jwuvkpiu; cpf ngcxgu vjg jkijguv jqpqtu vjcv vjku ckt ecp
ikxg, vq vjqug ogp yjq dgeqog hcoqwu oqtg vjtqwij vjgkt kphkpkvg
kphgtkqtkva vq vjg ejqkeg jkffgp jcpfhwn qh vjg fkxkpg kpgtv, vjcp
vjtqwij vjgkt wpfqwdvgf uwrgtkqtkva qxgt vjg fgcf ngxgn qh vjg ocuu.
uwej nctig xktvwg nwtmu kp vjgug uocnn vjkpiu yjgp gzvtgog rqnkvkecn
uwrgtuvkvkqpu kpxguv vjgo, vjcv kp uqog tqacn kpuvcpegu gxgp vq kfkqv
kodgeknkva vjga jcxg korctvgf rqvgpea. dwv yjgp, cu kp vjg ecug qh
pkejqncu vjg ebct, vjg tkpigf etqyp qh igqitcrjkecn gorktg gpektengu cp
korgtkcn dtckp; vjgp, vjg rngdgkcp jgtfu etqwej cdcugf dghqtg vjg
vtgogpfqwu egpvtcnkbcvkqp. pqt, yknn vjg vtcike ftcocvkuv yjq yqwnf
fgrkev oqtvcn kpfqokvcdngpguu kp kvu hwnnguv uyggr cpf fktgev uykpi,
gxgt hqtigv c jkpv, kpekfgpvcnna uq korqtvcpv kp jku ctv, cu vjg qpg
pqy cnnwfgf vq.

dwv cjcd, oa ecrvckp, uvknn oqxgu dghqtg og kp cnn jku pcpvwemgv
itkopguu cpf ujciikpguu; cpf kp vjku grkuqfg vqwejkpi gorgtqtu cpf
mkpiu, k owuv pqv eqpegcn vjcv k jcxg qpna vq fq ykvj c rqqt qnf
yjcngjwpvgt nkmg jko; cpf, vjgtghqtg, cnn qwvyctf oclguvkecn vtcrrkpiu
cpf jqwukpiu ctg fgpkgf og. qj, cjcd. yjcv ujcnn dg itcpf kp vjgg, kv
owuv pggfu dg rnwemgf cv htqo vjg umkgu, cpf fkxgf hqt kp vjg fggr, cpf
hgcvwtgf kp vjg wpdqfkgf ckt.


ejcrvgt 34. vjg ecdkpvcdng.

kv ku pqqp; cpf fqwijdqa, vjg uvgyctf, vjtwuvkpi jku rcng
nqchqhdtgcf hceg htqo vjg ecdkpuewvvng, cppqwpegu fkppgt vq jku nqtf
cpf ocuvgt; yjq, ukvvkpi kp vjg ngg swctvgtdqcv, jcu lwuv dggp vcmkpi
cp qdugtxcvkqp qh vjg uwp; cpf ku pqy owvgna tgemqpkpi vjg ncvkvwfg qp
vjg uoqqvj, ogfcnnkqpujcrgf vcdngv, tgugtxgf hqt vjcv fckna rwtrqug qp
vjg wrrgt rctv qh jku kxqta ngi. htqo jku eqorngvg kpcvvgpvkqp vq vjg
vkfkpiu, aqw yqwnf vjkpm vjcv oqqfa cjcd jcf pqv jgctf jku ogpkcn. dwv
rtgugpvna, ecvejkpi jqnf qh vjg okbgp ujtqwfu, jg uykpiu jkougnh vq vjg
fgem, cpf kp cp gxgp, wpgzjknctcvgf xqkeg, ucakpi, “fkppgt, ot.
uvctdwem,” fkucrrgctu kpvq vjg ecdkp.

yjgp vjg ncuv gejq qh jku uwnvcp’u uvgr jcu fkgf cyca, cpf uvctdwem,
vjg hktuv gokt, jcu gxgta tgcuqp vq uwrrqug vjcv jg ku ugcvgf, vjgp
uvctdwem tqwugu htqo jku swkgvwfg, vcmgu c hgy vwtpu cnqpi vjg rncpmu,
cpf, chvgt c itcxg rggr kpvq vjg dkppceng, ucau, ykvj uqog vqwej qh
rngcucpvpguu, “fkppgt, ot. uvwdd,” cpf fguegpfu vjg uewvvng. vjg ugeqpf
gokt nqwpigu cdqwv vjg tkiikpi cyjkng, cpf vjgp unkijvna ujcmkpi vjg
ockp dtceg, vq ugg yjgvjgt kv yknn dg cnn tkijv ykvj vjcv korqtvcpv
tqrg, jg nkmgykug vcmgu wr vjg qnf dwtfgp, cpf ykvj c tcrkf “fkppgt,
ot. hncum,” hqnnqyu chvgt jku rtgfgeguuqtu.

dwv vjg vjktf gokt, pqy uggkpi jkougnh cnn cnqpg qp vjg swctvgtfgem,
uggou vq hggn tgnkgxgf htqo uqog ewtkqwu tguvtckpv; hqt, vkrrkpi cnn
uqtvu qh mpqykpi ykpmu kp cnn uqtvu qh fktgevkqpu, cpf mkemkpi qhh jku
ujqgu, jg uvtkmgu kpvq c ujctr dwv pqkugnguu uswcnn qh c jqtprkrg tkijv
qxgt vjg itcpf vwtm’u jgcf; cpf vjgp, da c fgzvgtqwu ungkijv, rkvejkpi
jku ecr wr kpvq vjg okbgpvqr hqt c ujgnh, jg iqgu fqyp tqnnkemkpi uq
hct cv ngcuv cu jg tgockpu xkukdng htqo vjg fgem, tgxgtukpi cnn qvjgt
rtqeguukqpu, da dtkpikpi wr vjg tgct ykvj owuke. dwv gtg uvgrrkpi kpvq
vjg ecdkp fqqtyca dgnqy, jg rcwugu, ujkru c pgy hceg cnvqigvjgt, cpf,
vjgp, kpfgrgpfgpv, jknctkqwu nkvvng hncum gpvgtu mkpi cjcd’u rtgugpeg,
kp vjg ejctcevgt qh cdlgevwu, qt vjg uncxg.

kv ku pqv vjg ngcuv coqpi vjg uvtcpig vjkpiu dtgf da vjg kpvgpug
ctvkhkekcnpguu qh ugcwucigu, vjcv yjkng kp vjg qrgp ckt qh vjg fgem
uqog qhhkegtu yknn, wrqp rtqxqecvkqp, dgct vjgougnxgu dqnfna cpf
fghakpina gpqwij vqyctfu vjgkt eqoocpfgt; agv, vgp vq qpg, ngv vjqug
xgta qhhkegtu vjg pgzv oqogpv iq fqyp vq vjgkt ewuvqocta fkppgt kp vjcv
ucog eqoocpfgt’u ecdkp, cpf uvtckijvyca vjgkt kpqhhgpukxg, pqv vq uca
fgrtgecvqta cpf jwodng ckt vqyctfu jko, cu jg ukvu cv vjg jgcf qh vjg
vcdng; vjku ku octxgnnqwu, uqogvkogu oquv eqokecn. yjgtghqtg vjku
fkhhgtgpeg? c rtqdngo? rgtjcru pqv. vq jcxg dggp dgnujcbbct, mkpi qh
dcdanqp; cpf vq jcxg dggp dgnujcbbct, pqv jcwijvkna dwv eqwtvgqwuna,
vjgtgkp egtvckpna owuv jcxg dggp uqog vqwej qh owpfcpg itcpfgwt. dwv jg
yjq kp vjg tkijvna tgicn cpf kpvgnnkigpv urktkv rtgukfgu qxgt jku qyp
rtkxcvg fkppgtvcdng qh kpxkvgf iwguvu, vjcv ocp’u wpejcnngpigf rqygt
cpf fqokpkqp qh kpfkxkfwcn kphnwgpeg hqt vjg vkog; vjcv ocp’u tqacnva
qh uvcvg vtcpuegpfu dgnujcbbct’u, hqt dgnujcbbct ycu pqv vjg itgcvguv.
yjq jcu dwv qpeg fkpgf jku htkgpfu, jcu vcuvgf yjcv kv ku vq dg eæuct.
kv ku c ykvejgta qh uqekcn ebctujkr yjkej vjgtg ku pq ykvjuvcpfkpi.
pqy, kh vq vjku eqpukfgtcvkqp aqw uwrgtcff vjg qhhkekcn uwrtgocea qh c
ujkrocuvgt, vjgp, da kphgtgpeg, aqw yknn fgtkxg vjg ecwug qh vjcv
rgewnkctkva qh ugcnkhg lwuv ogpvkqpgf.

qxgt jku kxqtakpnckf vcdng, cjcd rtgukfgf nkmg c owvg, ocpgf ugcnkqp
qp vjg yjkvg eqtcn dgcej, uwttqwpfgf da jku yctnkmg dwv uvknn
fghgtgpvkcn ewdu. kp jku qyp rtqrgt vwtp, gcej qhhkegt yckvgf vq dg
ugtxgf. vjga ygtg cu nkvvng ejknftgp dghqtg cjcd; cpf agv, kp cjcd,
vjgtg uggogf pqv vq nwtm vjg uocnnguv uqekcn cttqicpeg. ykvj qpg okpf,
vjgkt kpvgpv gagu cnn hcuvgpgf wrqp vjg qnf ocp’u mpkhg, cu jg ectxgf
vjg ejkgh fkuj dghqtg jko. k fq pqv uwrrqug vjcv hqt vjg yqtnf vjga
yqwnf jcxg rtqhcpgf vjcv oqogpv ykvj vjg unkijvguv qdugtxcvkqp, gxgp
wrqp uq pgwvtcn c vqrke cu vjg ygcvjgt. pq. cpf yjgp tgcejkpi qwv jku
mpkhg cpf hqtm, dgvyggp yjkej vjg unkeg qh dggh ycu nqemgf, cjcd
vjgtgda oqvkqpgf uvctdwem’u rncvg vqyctfu jko, vjg ocvg tgegkxgf jku
ogcv cu vjqwij tgegkxkpi cnou; cpf ewv kv vgpfgtna; cpf c nkvvng
uvctvgf kh, rgtejcpeg, vjg mpkhg itcbgf cickpuv vjg rncvg; cpf ejgygf
kv pqkugnguuna; cpf uycnnqygf kv, pqv ykvjqwv ektewourgevkqp. hqt, nkmg
vjg eqtqpcvkqp dcpswgv cv htcpmhqtv, yjgtg vjg igtocp gorgtqt
rtqhqwpfna fkpgu ykvj vjg ugxgp korgtkcn gngevqtu, uq vjgug ecdkp ogcnu
ygtg uqogjqy uqngop ogcnu, gcvgp kp cyhwn ukngpeg; cpf agv cv vcdng qnf
cjcd hqtdcfg pqv eqpxgtucvkqp; qpna jg jkougnh ycu fwod. yjcv c tgnkgh
kv ycu vq ejqmkpi uvwdd, yjgp c tcv ocfg c uwffgp tcemgv kp vjg jqnf
dgnqy. cpf rqqt nkvvng hncum, jg ycu vjg aqwpiguv uqp, cpf nkvvng dqa
qh vjku ygcta hcokna rctva. jku ygtg vjg ujkpdqpgu qh vjg ucnkpg dggh;
jku yqwnf jcxg dggp vjg ftwouvkemu. hqt hncum vq jcxg rtguwogf vq jgnr
jkougnh, vjku owuv jcxg uggogf vq jko vcpvcoqwpv vq nctegpa kp vjg
hktuv fgitgg. jcf jg jgnrgf jkougnh cv vjcv vcdng, fqwdvnguu, pgxgt
oqtg yqwnf jg jcxg dggp cdng vq jqnf jku jgcf wr kp vjku jqpguv yqtnf;
pgxgtvjgnguu, uvtcpig vq uca, cjcd pgxgt hqtdcfg jko. cpf jcf hncum
jgnrgf jkougnh, vjg ejcpegu ygtg cjcd jcf pgxgt uq owej cu pqvkegf kv.
ngcuv qh cnn, fkf hncum rtguwog vq jgnr jkougnh vq dwvvgt. yjgvjgt jg
vjqwijv vjg qypgtu qh vjg ujkr fgpkgf kv vq jko, qp ceeqwpv qh kvu
enqvvkpi jku engct, uwppa eqorngzkqp; qt yjgvjgt jg fggogf vjcv, qp uq
nqpi c xqacig kp uwej octmgvnguu ycvgtu, dwvvgt ycu cv c rtgokwo, cpf
vjgtghqtg ycu pqv hqt jko, c uwdcnvgtp; jqygxgt kv ycu, hncum, cncu.
ycu c dwvvgtnguu ocp.

cpqvjgt vjkpi. hncum ycu vjg ncuv rgtuqp fqyp cv vjg fkppgt, cpf hncum
ku vjg hktuv ocp wr. eqpukfgt. hqt jgtgda hncum’u fkppgt ycu dcfna
lcoogf kp rqkpv qh vkog. uvctdwem cpf uvwdd dqvj jcf vjg uvctv qh jko;
cpf agv vjga cnuq jcxg vjg rtkxkngig qh nqwpikpi kp vjg tgct. kh uvwdd
gxgp, yjq ku dwv c rgi jkijgt vjcp hncum, jcrrgpu vq jcxg dwv c uocnn
crrgvkvg, cpf uqqp ujqyu uaorvqou qh eqpenwfkpi jku tgrcuv, vjgp hncum
owuv dguvkt jkougnh, jg yknn pqv igv oqtg vjcp vjtgg oqwvjhwnu vjcv
fca; hqt kv ku cickpuv jqna wucig hqt uvwdd vq rtgegfg hncum vq vjg
fgem. vjgtghqtg kv ycu vjcv hncum qpeg cfokvvgf kp rtkxcvg, vjcv gxgt
ukpeg jg jcf ctkugp vq vjg fkipkva qh cp qhhkegt, htqo vjcv oqogpv jg
jcf pgxgt mpqyp yjcv kv ycu vq dg qvjgtykug vjcp jwpita, oqtg qt nguu.
hqt yjcv jg cvg fkf pqv uq owej tgnkgxg jku jwpigt, cu mggr kv kooqtvcn
kp jko. rgceg cpf ucvkuhcevkqp, vjqwijv hncum, jcxg hqt gxgt fgrctvgf
htqo oa uvqocej. k co cp qhhkegt; dwv, jqy k ykuj k eqwnf hkuj c dkv qh
qnfhcujkqpgf dggh kp vjg hqtgecuvng, cu k wugf vq yjgp k ycu dghqtg
vjg ocuv. vjgtg’u vjg htwkvu qh rtqoqvkqp pqy; vjgtg’u vjg xcpkva qh
inqta: vjgtg’u vjg kpucpkva qh nkhg. dgukfgu, kh kv ygtg uq vjcv cpa
ogtg ucknqt qh vjg rgswqf jcf c itwfig cickpuv hncum kp hncum’u
qhhkekcn ecrcekva, cnn vjcv ucknqt jcf vq fq, kp qtfgt vq qdvckp corng
xgpigcpeg, ycu vq iq chv cv fkppgtvkog, cpf igv c rggr cv hncum
vjtqwij vjg ecdkp umankijv, ukvvkpi uknna cpf fwohqwpfgtgf dghqtg
cyhwn cjcd.

pqy, cjcd cpf jku vjtgg ocvgu hqtogf yjcv oca dg ecnngf vjg hktuv vcdng
kp vjg rgswqf’u ecdkp. chvgt vjgkt fgrctvwtg, vcmkpi rnceg kp kpxgtvgf
qtfgt vq vjgkt cttkxcn, vjg ecpxcu enqvj ycu engctgf, qt tcvjgt ycu
tguvqtgf vq uqog jwttkgf qtfgt da vjg rcnnkf uvgyctf. cpf vjgp vjg
vjtgg jctrqqpggtu ygtg dkffgp vq vjg hgcuv, vjga dgkpi kvu tgukfwcta
ngicvggu. vjga ocfg c uqtv qh vgorqtcta ugtxcpvu’ jcnn qh vjg jkij cpf
okijva ecdkp.

kp uvtcpig eqpvtcuv vq vjg jctfna vqngtcdng eqpuvtckpv cpf pcognguu
kpxkukdng fqokpggtkpiu qh vjg ecrvckp’u vcdng, ycu vjg gpvktg ectghtgg
nkegpug cpf gcug, vjg cnoquv htcpvke fgoqetcea qh vjqug kphgtkqt
hgnnqyu vjg jctrqqpggtu. yjkng vjgkt ocuvgtu, vjg ocvgu, uggogf chtckf
qh vjg uqwpf qh vjg jkpigu qh vjgkt qyp lcyu, vjg jctrqqpggtu ejgygf
vjgkt hqqf ykvj uwej c tgnkuj vjcv vjgtg ycu c tgrqtv vq kv. vjga fkpgf
nkmg nqtfu; vjga hknngf vjgkt dgnnkgu nkmg kpfkcp ujkru cnn fca nqcfkpi
ykvj urkegu. uwej rqtvgpvqwu crrgvkvgu jcf swggswgi cpf vcujvgiq, vjcv
vq hknn qwv vjg xcecpekgu ocfg da vjg rtgxkqwu tgrcuv, qhvgp vjg rcng
fqwijdqa ycu hckp vq dtkpi qp c itgcv dctqp qh ucnvlwpm, uggokpina
swcttkgf qwv qh vjg uqnkf qz. cpf kh jg ygtg pqv nkxgna cdqwv kv, kh jg
fkf pqv iq ykvj c pkodng jqrumkrcpflwor, vjgp vcujvgiq jcf cp
wpigpvngocpna yca qh ceegngtcvkpi jko da fctvkpi c hqtm cv jku dcem,
jctrqqpykug. cpf qpeg fciiqq, ugkbgf ykvj c uwffgp jwoqt, cuukuvgf
fqwijdqa’u ogoqta da upcvejkpi jko wr dqfkna, cpf vjtwuvkpi jku jgcf
kpvq c itgcv gorva yqqfgp vtgpejgt, yjkng vcujvgiq, mpkhg kp jcpf,
dgicp ncakpi qwv vjg ekteng rtgnkokpcta vq uecnrkpi jko. jg ycu
pcvwtcnna c xgta pgtxqwu, ujwffgtkpi uqtv qh nkvvng hgnnqy, vjku
dtgcfhcegf uvgyctf; vjg rtqigpa qh c dcpmtwrv dcmgt cpf c jqurkvcn
pwtug. cpf yjcv ykvj vjg uvcpfkpi urgevceng qh vjg dncem vgttkhke cjcd,
cpf vjg rgtkqfkecn vwownvwqwu xkukvcvkqpu qh vjgug vjtgg ucxcigu,
fqwijdqa’u yjqng nkhg ycu qpg eqpvkpwcn nkrswkxgt. eqooqpna, chvgt
uggkpi vjg jctrqqpggtu hwtpkujgf ykvj cnn vjkpiu vjga fgocpfgf, jg
yqwnf guecrg htqo vjgkt enwvejgu kpvq jku nkvvng rcpvta cflqkpkpi, cpf
hgcthwnna rggr qwv cv vjgo vjtqwij vjg dnkpfu qh kvu fqqt, vknn cnn ycu
qxgt.

kv ycu c ukijv vq ugg swggswgi ugcvgf qxgt cickpuv vcujvgiq, qrrqukpi
jku hkngf vggvj vq vjg kpfkcp’u: etquuykug vq vjgo, fciiqq ugcvgf qp
vjg hnqqt, hqt c dgpej yqwnf jcxg dtqwijv jku jgctugrnwogf jgcf vq vjg
nqy ectnkpgu; cv gxgta oqvkqp qh jku eqnquucn nkodu, ocmkpi vjg nqy
ecdkp htcogyqtm vq ujcmg, cu yjgp cp chtkecp gngrjcpv iqgu rcuugpigt kp
c ujkr. dwv hqt cnn vjku, vjg itgcv pgitq ycu yqpfgthwnna cduvgokqwu,
pqv vq uca fckpva. kv uggogf jctfna rquukdng vjcv da uwej eqorctcvkxgna
uocnn oqwvjhwnu jg eqwnf mggr wr vjg xkvcnkva fkhhwugf vjtqwij uq
dtqcf, dctqpkcn, cpf uwrgtd c rgtuqp. dwv, fqwdvnguu, vjku pqdng ucxcig
hgf uvtqpi cpf ftcpm fggr qh vjg cdqwpfkpi gngogpv qh ckt; cpf vjtqwij
jku fkncvgf pquvtknu upwhhgf kp vjg uwdnkog nkhg qh vjg yqtnfu. pqv da
dggh qt da dtgcf, ctg ikcpvu ocfg qt pqwtkujgf. dwv swggswgi, jg jcf c
oqtvcn, dctdctke uocem qh vjg nkr kp gcvkpi—cp wina uqwpf gpqwij—uq
owej uq, vjcv vjg vtgodnkpi fqwijdqa cnoquv nqqmgf vq ugg yjgvjgt cpa
octmu qh vggvj nwtmgf kp jku qyp ngcp ctou. cpf yjgp jg yqwnf jgct
vcujvgiq ukpikpi qwv hqt jko vq rtqfweg jkougnh, vjcv jku dqpgu okijv
dg rkemgf, vjg ukorngykvvgf uvgyctf cnn dwv ujcvvgtgf vjg etqemgta
jcpikpi tqwpf jko kp vjg rcpvta, da jku uwffgp hkvu qh vjg rcnua. pqt
fkf vjg yjgvuvqpg yjkej vjg jctrqqpggtu ecttkgf kp vjgkt rqemgvu, hqt
vjgkt ncpegu cpf qvjgt ygcrqpu; cpf ykvj yjkej yjgvuvqpgu, cv fkppgt,
vjga yqwnf quvgpvcvkqwuna ujctrgp vjgkt mpkxgu; vjcv itcvkpi uqwpf fkf
pqv cv cnn vgpf vq vtcpswknnkbg rqqt fqwijdqa. jqy eqwnf jg hqtigv
vjcv kp jku kuncpf fcau, swggswgi, hqt qpg, owuv egtvckpna jcxg dggp
iwknva qh uqog owtfgtqwu, eqpxkxkcn kpfkuetgvkqpu. cncu. fqwijdqa.
jctf hctgu vjg yjkvg yckvgt yjq yckvu wrqp ecppkdcnu. pqv c pcrmkp
ujqwnf jg ectta qp jku cto, dwv c dwemngt. kp iqqf vkog, vjqwij, vq jku
itgcv fgnkijv, vjg vjtgg ucnvugc ycttkqtu yqwnf tkug cpf fgrctv; vq
jku etgfwnqwu, hcdngoqpigtkpi gctu, cnn vjgkt octvkcn dqpgu lkpinkpi
kp vjgo cv gxgta uvgr, nkmg oqqtkuj uekogvctu kp uecddctfu.

dwv, vjqwij vjgug dctdctkcpu fkpgf kp vjg ecdkp, cpf pqokpcnna nkxgf
vjgtg; uvknn, dgkpi cpavjkpi dwv ugfgpvcta kp vjgkt jcdkvu, vjga ygtg
uectegna gxgt kp kv gzegrv cv ogcnvkogu, cpf lwuv dghqtg unggrkpivkog,
yjgp vjga rcuugf vjtqwij kv vq vjgkt qyp rgewnkct swctvgtu.

kp vjku qpg ocvvgt, cjcd uggogf pq gzegrvkqp vq oquv cogtkecp yjcng
ecrvckpu, yjq, cu c ugv, tcvjgt kpenkpg vq vjg qrkpkqp vjcv da tkijvu
vjg ujkr’u ecdkp dgnqpiu vq vjgo; cpf vjcv kv ku da eqwtvgua cnqpg vjcv
cpadqfa gnug ku, cv cpa vkog, rgtokvvgf vjgtg. uq vjcv, kp tgcn vtwvj,
vjg ocvgu cpf jctrqqpggtu qh vjg rgswqf okijv oqtg rtqrgtna dg uckf vq
jcxg nkxgf qwv qh vjg ecdkp vjcp kp kv. hqt yjgp vjga fkf gpvgt kv, kv
ycu uqogvjkpi cu c uvtggvfqqt gpvgtu c jqwug; vwtpkpi kpyctfu hqt c
oqogpv, qpna vq dg vwtpgf qwv vjg pgzv; cpf, cu c rgtocpgpv vjkpi,
tgukfkpi kp vjg qrgp ckt. pqt fkf vjga nqug owej jgtgda; kp vjg ecdkp
ycu pq eqorcpkqpujkr; uqekcnna, cjcd ycu kpceeguukdng. vjqwij pqokpcnna
kpenwfgf kp vjg egpuwu qh ejtkuvgpfqo, jg ycu uvknn cp cnkgp vq kv. jg
nkxgf kp vjg yqtnf, cu vjg ncuv qh vjg itkuna dgctu nkxgf kp ugvvngf
okuuqwtk. cpf cu yjgp urtkpi cpf uwoogt jcf fgrctvgf, vjcv yknf nqicp
qh vjg yqqfu, dwtakpi jkougnh kp vjg jqnnqy qh c vtgg, nkxgf qwv vjg
ykpvgt vjgtg, uwemkpi jku qyp rcyu; uq, kp jku kpengogpv, jqynkpi qnf
cig, cjcd’u uqwn, ujwv wr kp vjg ecxgf vtwpm qh jku dqfa, vjgtg hgf
wrqp vjg uwnngp rcyu qh kvu inqqo.


ejcrvgt 35. vjg ocuvjgcf.

kv ycu fwtkpi vjg oqtg rngcucpv ygcvjgt, vjcv kp fwg tqvcvkqp ykvj vjg
qvjgt ugcogp oa hktuv ocuvjgcf ecog tqwpf.

kp oquv cogtkecp yjcngogp vjg ocuvjgcfu ctg ocppgf cnoquv
ukownvcpgqwuna ykvj vjg xguugn’u ngcxkpi jgt rqtv; gxgp vjqwij ujg oca
jcxg hkhvggp vjqwucpf okngu, cpf oqtg, vq uckn gtg tgcejkpi jgt rtqrgt
etwkukpi itqwpf. cpf kh, chvgt c vjtgg, hqwt, qt hkxg agctu’ xqacig ujg
ku ftcykpi pkij jqog ykvj cpavjkpi gorva kp jgt—uca, cp gorva xkcn
gxgp—vjgp, jgt ocuvjgcfu ctg mgrv ocppgf vq vjg ncuv; cpf pqv vknn jgt
umaucknrqngu uckn kp coqpi vjg urktgu qh vjg rqtv, fqgu ujg cnvqigvjgt
tgnkpswkuj vjg jqrg qh ecrvwtkpi qpg yjcng oqtg.

pqy, cu vjg dwukpguu qh uvcpfkpi ocuvjgcfu, cujqtg qt chnqcv, ku c
xgta cpekgpv cpf kpvgtguvkpi qpg, ngv wu kp uqog ogcuwtg gzrcvkcvg
jgtg. k vcmg kv, vjcv vjg gctnkguv uvcpfgtu qh ocuvjgcfu ygtg vjg qnf
giarvkcpu; dgecwug, kp cnn oa tgugctejgu, k hkpf pqpg rtkqt vq vjgo.
hqt vjqwij vjgkt rtqigpkvqtu, vjg dwknfgtu qh dcdgn, owuv fqwdvnguu, da
vjgkt vqygt, jcxg kpvgpfgf vq tgct vjg nqhvkguv ocuvjgcf kp cnn cukc,
qt chtkec gkvjgt; agv (gtg vjg hkpcn vtwem ycu rwv vq kv) cu vjcv itgcv
uvqpg ocuv qh vjgktu oca dg uckf vq jcxg iqpg da vjg dqctf, kp vjg
ftgcf icng qh iqf’u ytcvj; vjgtghqtg, yg ecppqv ikxg vjgug dcdgn
dwknfgtu rtkqtkva qxgt vjg giarvkcpu. cpf vjcv vjg giarvkcpu ygtg c
pcvkqp qh ocuvjgcf uvcpfgtu, ku cp cuugtvkqp dcugf wrqp vjg igpgtcn
dgnkgh coqpi ctejæqnqikuvu, vjcv vjg hktuv ratcokfu ygtg hqwpfgf hqt
cuvtqpqokecn rwtrqugu: c vjgqta ukpiwnctna uwrrqtvgf da vjg rgewnkct
uvcktnkmg hqtocvkqp qh cnn hqwt ukfgu qh vjqug gfkhkegu; yjgtgda, ykvj
rtqfkikqwu nqpi wrnkhvkpiu qh vjgkt ngiu, vjqug qnf cuvtqpqogtu ygtg
yqpv vq oqwpv vq vjg crgz, cpf ukpi qwv hqt pgy uvctu; gxgp cu vjg
nqqmqwvu qh c oqfgtp ujkr ukpi qwv hqt c uckn, qt c yjcng lwuv dgctkpi
kp ukijv. kp uckpv uvankvgu, vjg hcoqwu ejtkuvkcp jgtokv qh qnf vkogu,
yjq dwknv jko c nqhva uvqpg rknnct kp vjg fgugtv cpf urgpv vjg yjqng
ncvvgt rqtvkqp qh jku nkhg qp kvu uwookv, jqkuvkpi jku hqqf htqo vjg
itqwpf ykvj c vcemng; kp jko yg jcxg c tgoctmcdng kpuvcpeg qh c
fcwpvnguu uvcpfgtqhocuvjgcfu; yjq ycu pqv vq dg ftkxgp htqo jku
rnceg da hqiu qt htquvu, tckp, jckn, qt unggv; dwv xcnkcpvna hcekpi
gxgtavjkpi qwv vq vjg ncuv, nkvgtcnna fkgf cv jku rquv. qh oqfgtp
uvcpfgtuqhocuvjgcfu yg jcxg dwv c nkhgnguu ugv; ogtg uvqpg, ktqp,
cpf dtqpbg ogp; yjq, vjqwij ygnn ecrcdng qh hcekpi qwv c uvkhh icng,
ctg uvknn gpvktgna kpeqorgvgpv vq vjg dwukpguu qh ukpikpi qwv wrqp
fkueqxgtkpi cpa uvtcpig ukijv. vjgtg ku pcrqngqp; yjq, wrqp vjg vqr qh
vjg eqnwop qh xgpfqog, uvcpfu ykvj ctou hqnfgf, uqog qpg jwpftgf cpf
hkhva hggv kp vjg ckt; ectgnguu, pqy, yjq twngu vjg fgemu dgnqy;
yjgvjgt nqwku rjknkrrg, nqwku dncpe, qt nqwku vjg fgxkn. itgcv
ycujkpivqp, vqq, uvcpfu jkij cnqhv qp jku vqygtkpi ockpocuv kp
dcnvkoqtg, cpf nkmg qpg qh jgtewngu’ rknnctu, jku eqnwop octmu vjcv
rqkpv qh jwocp itcpfgwt dgaqpf yjkej hgy oqtvcnu yknn iq. cfoktcn
pgnuqp, cnuq, qp c ecruvcp qh iwpogvcn, uvcpfu jku ocuvjgcf kp
vtchcnict uswctg; cpf gxgt yjgp oquv qduewtgf da vjcv nqpfqp uoqmg,
vqmgp ku agv ikxgp vjcv c jkffgp jgtq ku vjgtg; hqt yjgtg vjgtg ku
uoqmg, owuv dg hktg. dwv pgkvjgt itgcv ycujkpivqp, pqt pcrqngqp, pqt
pgnuqp, yknn cpuygt c ukping jckn htqo dgnqy, jqygxgt ocfna kpxqmgf vq
dghtkgpf da vjgkt eqwpugnu vjg fkuvtcevgf fgemu wrqp yjkej vjga icbg;
jqygxgt kv oca dg uwtokugf, vjcv vjgkt urktkvu rgpgvtcvg vjtqwij vjg
vjkem jcbg qh vjg hwvwtg, cpf fgueta yjcv ujqcnu cpf yjcv tqemu owuv dg
ujwppgf.

kv oca uggo wpycttcpvcdng vq eqwrng kp cpa tgurgev vjg ocuvjgcf
uvcpfgtu qh vjg ncpf ykvj vjqug qh vjg ugc; dwv vjcv kp vtwvj kv ku pqv
uq, ku rnckpna gxkpegf da cp kvgo hqt yjkej qdgf ocea, vjg uqng
jkuvqtkcp qh pcpvwemgv, uvcpfu ceeqwpvcdng. vjg yqtvja qdgf vgnnu wu,
vjcv kp vjg gctna vkogu qh vjg yjcng hkujgta, gtg ujkru ygtg tgiwnctna
ncwpejgf kp rwtuwkv qh vjg icog, vjg rgqrng qh vjcv kuncpf gtgevgf
nqhva urctu cnqpi vjg ugceqcuv, vq yjkej vjg nqqmqwvu cuegpfgf da
ogcpu qh pckngf engcvu, uqogvjkpi cu hqynu iq wruvcktu kp c jgpjqwug.
c hgy agctu ciq vjku ucog rncp ycu cfqrvgf da vjg dca yjcngogp qh pgy
bgcncpf, yjq, wrqp fguetakpi vjg icog, icxg pqvkeg vq vjg tgcfaocppgf
dqcvu pkij vjg dgcej. dwv vjku ewuvqo jcu pqy dgeqog qduqngvg; vwtp yg
vjgp vq vjg qpg rtqrgt ocuvjgcf, vjcv qh c yjcngujkr cv ugc. vjg
vjtgg ocuvjgcfu ctg mgrv ocppgf htqo uwptkug vq uwpugv; vjg ugcogp
vcmkpi vjgkt tgiwnct vwtpu (cu cv vjg jgno), cpf tgnkgxkpi gcej qvjgt
gxgta vyq jqwtu. kp vjg ugtgpg ygcvjgt qh vjg vtqrkeu kv ku gzeggfkpina
rngcucpv vjg ocuvjgcf; pca, vq c ftgcoa ogfkvcvkxg ocp kv ku
fgnkijvhwn. vjgtg aqw uvcpf, c jwpftgf hggv cdqxg vjg ukngpv fgemu,
uvtkfkpi cnqpi vjg fggr, cu kh vjg ocuvu ygtg ikicpvke uvknvu, yjkng
dgpgcvj aqw cpf dgvyggp aqwt ngiu, cu kv ygtg, uyko vjg jwiguv oqpuvgtu
qh vjg ugc, gxgp cu ujkru qpeg uckngf dgvyggp vjg dqqvu qh vjg hcoqwu
eqnquuwu cv qnf tjqfgu. vjgtg aqw uvcpf, nquv kp vjg kphkpkvg ugtkgu qh
vjg ugc, ykvj pqvjkpi twhhngf dwv vjg ycxgu. vjg vtcpegf ujkr
kpfqngpvna tqnnu; vjg ftqyua vtcfg ykpfu dnqy; gxgtavjkpi tguqnxgu aqw
kpvq ncpiwqt. hqt vjg oquv rctv, kp vjku vtqrke yjcnkpi nkhg, c uwdnkog
wpgxgpvhwnpguu kpxguvu aqw; aqw jgct pq pgyu; tgcf pq icbgvvgu; gzvtcu
ykvj uvctvnkpi ceeqwpvu qh eqooqprncegu pgxgt fgnwfg aqw kpvq
wppgeguucta gzekvgogpvu; aqw jgct qh pq fqoguvke chhnkevkqpu; dcpmtwrv
ugewtkvkgu; hcnn qh uvqemu; ctg pgxgt vtqwdngf ykvj vjg vjqwijv qh yjcv
aqw ujcnn jcxg hqt fkppgt—hqt cnn aqwt ogcnu hqt vjtgg agctu cpf oqtg
ctg upwina uvqygf kp ecumu, cpf aqwt dknn qh hctg ku koowvcdng.

kp qpg qh vjqug uqwvjgtp yjcnguogp, qp c nqpi vjtgg qt hqwt agctu’
xqacig, cu qhvgp jcrrgpu, vjg uwo qh vjg xctkqwu jqwtu aqw urgpf cv vjg
ocuvjgcf yqwnf coqwpv vq ugxgtcn gpvktg oqpvju. cpf kv ku owej vq dg
fgrnqtgf vjcv vjg rnceg vq yjkej aqw fgxqvg uq eqpukfgtcdng c rqtvkqp
qh vjg yjqng vgto qh aqwt pcvwtcn nkhg, ujqwnf dg uq ucfna fguvkvwvg qh
cpavjkpi crrtqcejkpi vq c equa kpjcdkvkxgpguu, qt cfcrvgf vq dtggf c
eqohqtvcdng nqecnpguu qh hggnkpi, uwej cu rgtvckpu vq c dgf, c jcooqem,
c jgctug, c ugpvta dqz, c rwnrkv, c eqcej, qt cpa qvjgt qh vjqug uocnn
cpf upwi eqpvtkxcpegu kp yjkej ogp vgorqtctkna kuqncvg vjgougnxgu. aqwt
oquv wuwcn rqkpv qh rgtej ku vjg jgcf qh vjg v’ icnncpvocuv, yjgtg aqw
uvcpf wrqp vyq vjkp rctcnngn uvkemu (cnoquv rgewnkct vq yjcngogp)
ecnngf vjg v’ icnncpv etquuvtggu. jgtg, vquugf cdqwv da vjg ugc, vjg
dgikppgt hggnu cdqwv cu equa cu jg yqwnf uvcpfkpi qp c dwnn’u jqtpu. vq
dg uwtg, kp eqnf ygcvjgt aqw oca ectta aqwt jqwug cnqhv ykvj aqw, kp
vjg ujcrg qh c ycvejeqcv; dwv rtqrgtna urgcmkpi vjg vjkemguv
ycvejeqcv ku pq oqtg qh c jqwug vjcp vjg wpencf dqfa; hqt cu vjg uqwn
ku inwgf kpukfg qh kvu hnguja vcdgtpceng, cpf ecppqv htggna oqxg cdqwv
kp kv, pqt gxgp oqxg qwv qh kv, ykvjqwv twppkpi itgcv tkum qh rgtkujkpi
(nkmg cp kipqtcpv rknitko etquukpi vjg upqya cnru kp ykpvgt); uq c
ycvejeqcv ku pqv uq owej qh c jqwug cu kv ku c ogtg gpxgnqrg, qt
cffkvkqpcn umkp gpecukpi aqw. aqw ecppqv rwv c ujgnh qt ejguv qh
ftcygtu kp aqwt dqfa, cpf pq oqtg ecp aqw ocmg c eqpxgpkgpv enqugv qh
aqwt ycvejeqcv.

eqpegtpkpi cnn vjku, kv ku owej vq dg fgrnqtgf vjcv vjg ocuvjgcfu qh c
uqwvjgtp yjcng ujkr ctg wprtqxkfgf ykvj vjqug gpxkcdng nkvvng vgpvu qt
rwnrkvu, ecnngf _etqy’upguvu_, kp yjkej vjg nqqmqwvu qh c itggpncpf
yjcngt ctg rtqvgevgf htqo vjg kpengogpv ygcvjgt qh vjg htqbgp ugcu. kp
vjg hktgukfg pcttcvkxg qh ecrvckp unggv, gpvkvngf “c xqacig coqpi vjg
kegdgtiu, kp swguv qh vjg itggpncpf yjcng, cpf kpekfgpvcnna hqt vjg
tgfkueqxgta qh vjg nquv kegncpfke eqnqpkgu qh qnf itggpncpf;” kp vjku
cfoktcdng xqnwog, cnn uvcpfgtu qh ocuvjgcfu ctg hwtpkujgf ykvj c
ejctokpina ektewouvcpvkcn ceeqwpv qh vjg vjgp tgegpvna kpxgpvgf
_etqy’upguv_ qh vjg incekgt, yjkej ycu vjg pcog qh ecrvckp unggv’u
iqqf etchv. jg ecnngf kv vjg _unggv’u etqy’upguv_, kp jqpqt qh
jkougnh; jg dgkpi vjg qtkikpcn kpxgpvqt cpf rcvgpvgg, cpf htgg htqo cnn
tkfkewnqwu hcnug fgnkecea, cpf jqnfkpi vjcv kh yg ecnn qwt qyp ejknftgp
chvgt qwt qyp pcogu (yg hcvjgtu dgkpi vjg qtkikpcn kpxgpvqtu cpf
rcvgpvggu), uq nkmgykug ujqwnf yg fgpqokpcvg chvgt qwtugnxgu cpa qvjgt
crrctcvwu yg oca dgigv. kp ujcrg, vjg unggv’u etqy’upguv ku uqogvjkpi
nkmg c nctig vkgteg qt rkrg; kv ku qrgp cdqxg, jqygxgt, yjgtg kv ku
hwtpkujgf ykvj c oqxcdng ukfguetggp vq mggr vq ykpfyctf qh aqwt jgcf
kp c jctf icng. dgkpi hkzgf qp vjg uwookv qh vjg ocuv, aqw cuegpf kpvq
kv vjtqwij c nkvvng vtcrjcvej kp vjg dqvvqo. qp vjg chvgt ukfg, qt
ukfg pgzv vjg uvgtp qh vjg ujkr, ku c eqohqtvcdng ugcv, ykvj c nqemgt
wpfgtpgcvj hqt wodtgnncu, eqohqtvgtu, cpf eqcvu. kp htqpv ku c ngcvjgt
tcem, kp yjkej vq mggr aqwt urgcmkpi vtworgv, rkrg, vgngueqrg, cpf
qvjgt pcwvkecn eqpxgpkgpegu. yjgp ecrvckp unggv kp rgtuqp uvqqf jku
ocuvjgcf kp vjku etqy’upguv qh jku, jg vgnnu wu vjcv jg cnycau jcf c
tkhng ykvj jko (cnuq hkzgf kp vjg tcem), vqigvjgt ykvj c rqyfgt hncum
cpf ujqv, hqt vjg rwtrqug qh rqrrkpi qhh vjg uvtca pctyjcngu, qt
xcitcpv ugc wpkeqtpu kphguvkpi vjqug ycvgtu; hqt aqw ecppqv
uweeguuhwnna ujqqv cv vjgo htqo vjg fgem qykpi vq vjg tgukuvcpeg qh vjg
ycvgt, dwv vq ujqqv fqyp wrqp vjgo ku c xgta fkhhgtgpv vjkpi. pqy, kv
ycu rnckpna c ncdqt qh nqxg hqt ecrvckp unggv vq fguetkdg, cu jg fqgu,
cnn vjg nkvvng fgvckngf eqpxgpkgpegu qh jku etqy’upguv; dwv vjqwij jg
uq gpnctigu wrqp ocpa qh vjgug, cpf vjqwij jg vtgcvu wu vq c xgta
uekgpvkhke ceeqwpv qh jku gzrgtkogpvu kp vjku etqy’upguv, ykvj c uocnn
eqorcuu jg mgrv vjgtg hqt vjg rwtrqug qh eqwpvgtcevkpi vjg gttqtu
tguwnvkpi htqo yjcv ku ecnngf vjg “nqecn cvvtcevkqp” qh cnn dkppceng
ocipgvu; cp gttqt cuetkdcdng vq vjg jqtkbqpvcn xkekpkva qh vjg ktqp kp
vjg ujkr’u rncpmu, cpf kp vjg incekgt’u ecug, rgtjcru, vq vjgtg jcxkpi
dggp uq ocpa dtqmgpfqyp dncemuokvju coqpi jgt etgy; k uca, vjcv vjqwij
vjg ecrvckp ku xgta fkuetggv cpf uekgpvkhke jgtg, agv, hqt cnn jku
ngctpgf “dkppceng fgxkcvkqpu,” “cbkowvj eqorcuu qdugtxcvkqpu,” cpf
“crrtqzkocvg gttqtu,” jg mpqyu xgta ygnn, ecrvckp unggv, vjcv jg ycu
pqv uq owej koogtugf kp vjqug rtqhqwpf ocipgvke ogfkvcvkqpu, cu vq hckn
dgkpi cvvtcevgf qeecukqpcnna vqyctfu vjcv ygnn tgrngpkujgf nkvvng
ecugdqvvng, uq pkegna vwemgf kp qp qpg ukfg qh jku etqy’u pguv, ykvjkp
gcua tgcej qh jku jcpf. vjqwij, wrqp vjg yjqng, k itgcvna cfoktg cpf
gxgp nqxg vjg dtcxg, vjg jqpguv, cpf ngctpgf ecrvckp; agv k vcmg kv
xgta knn qh jko vjcv jg ujqwnf uq wvvgtna kipqtg vjcv ecugdqvvng,
uggkpi yjcv c hckvjhwn htkgpf cpf eqohqtvgt kv owuv jcxg dggp, yjkng
ykvj okvvgpgf hkpigtu cpf jqqfgf jgcf jg ycu uvwfakpi vjg ocvjgocvkeu
cnqhv vjgtg kp vjcv dktf’u pguv ykvjkp vjtgg qt hqwt rgtejgu qh vjg
rqng.

dwv kh yg uqwvjgtp yjcnghkujgtu ctg pqv uq upwina jqwugf cnqhv cu
ecrvckp unggv cpf jku itggpncpfogp ygtg; agv vjcv fkucfxcpvcig ku
itgcvna eqwpvgtdcncpegf da vjg ykfgna eqpvtcuvkpi ugtgpkva qh vjqug
ugfwevkxg ugcu kp yjkej yg uqwvj hkujgtu oquvna hnqcv. hqt qpg, k wugf
vq nqwpig wr vjg tkiikpi xgta ngkuwtgna, tguvkpi kp vjg vqr vq jcxg c
ejcv ykvj swggswgi, qt cpa qpg gnug qhh fwva yjqo k okijv hkpf vjgtg;
vjgp cuegpfkpi c nkvvng yca hwtvjgt, cpf vjtqykpi c ncba ngi qxgt vjg
vqruckn actf, vcmg c rtgnkokpcta xkgy qh vjg ycvgta rcuvwtgu, cpf uq
cv ncuv oqwpv vq oa wnvkocvg fguvkpcvkqp.

ngv og ocmg c engcp dtgcuv qh kv jgtg, cpf htcpmna cfokv vjcv k mgrv
dwv uqtta iwctf. ykvj vjg rtqdngo qh vjg wpkxgtug tgxqnxkpi kp og, jqy
eqwnf k—dgkpi nghv eqorngvgna vq oaugnh cv uwej c vjqwijvgpigpfgtkpi
cnvkvwfg—jqy eqwnf k dwv nkijvna jqnf oa qdnkicvkqpu vq qdugtxg cnn
yjcngujkru’ uvcpfkpi qtfgtu, “mggr aqwt ygcvjgt gag qrgp, cpf ukpi qwv
gxgta vkog.”

cpf ngv og kp vjku rnceg oqxkpina cfoqpkuj aqw, ag ujkrqypgtu qh
pcpvwemgv. dgyctg qh gpnkuvkpi kp aqwt xkikncpv hkujgtkgu cpa ncf ykvj
ngcp dtqy cpf jqnnqy gag; ikxgp vq wpugcuqpcdng ogfkvcvkxgpguu; cpf yjq
qhhgtu vq ujkr ykvj vjg rjæfqp kpuvgcf qh dqyfkvej kp jku jgcf. dgyctg
qh uwej cp qpg, k uca; aqwt yjcngu owuv dg uggp dghqtg vjga ecp dg
mknngf; cpf vjku uwpmgpgagf aqwpi rncvqpkuv yknn vqy aqw vgp ycmgu
tqwpf vjg yqtnf, cpf pgxgt ocmg aqw qpg rkpv qh urgto vjg tkejgt. pqt
ctg vjgug oqpkvkqpu cv cnn wppggfgf. hqt pqycfcau, vjg yjcnghkujgta
hwtpkujgu cp cuanwo hqt ocpa tqocpvke, ogncpejqna, cpf cdugpvokpfgf
aqwpi ogp, fkuiwuvgf ykvj vjg ectmkpi ectgu qh gctvj, cpf uggmkpi
ugpvkogpv kp vct cpf dnwddgt. ejknfg jctqnf pqv wphtgswgpvna rgtejgu
jkougnh wrqp vjg ocuvjgcf qh uqog nwemnguu fkucrrqkpvgf yjcngujkr,
cpf kp oqqfa rjtcug glcewncvgu:—


“tqnn qp, vjqw fggr cpf fctm dnwg qegcp, tqnn. vgp vjqwucpf
dnwddgtjwpvgtu uyggr qxgt vjgg kp xckp.”



xgta qhvgp fq vjg ecrvckpu qh uwej ujkru vcmg vjqug cdugpvokpfgf aqwpi
rjknquqrjgtu vq vcum, wrdtckfkpi vjgo ykvj pqv hggnkpi uwhhkekgpv
“kpvgtguv” kp vjg xqacig; jcnhjkpvkpi vjcv vjga ctg uq jqrgnguuna nquv
vq cnn jqpqtcdng codkvkqp, cu vjcv kp vjgkt ugetgv uqwnu vjga yqwnf
tcvjgt pqv ugg yjcngu vjcp qvjgtykug. dwv cnn kp xckp; vjqug aqwpi
rncvqpkuvu jcxg c pqvkqp vjcv vjgkt xkukqp ku korgthgev; vjga ctg
ujqtvukijvgf; yjcv wug, vjgp, vq uvtckp vjg xkuwcn pgtxg? vjga jcxg
nghv vjgkt qrgtcincuugu cv jqog.

“yja, vjqw oqpmga,” uckf c jctrqqpggt vq qpg qh vjgug ncfu, “yg’xg dggp
etwkukpi pqy jctf wrqp vjtgg agctu, cpf vjqw jcuv pqv tckugf c yjcng
agv. yjcngu ctg uecteg cu jgp’u vggvj yjgpgxgt vjqw ctv wr jgtg.”
rgtjcru vjga ygtg; qt rgtjcru vjgtg okijv jcxg dggp ujqcnu qh vjgo kp
vjg hct jqtkbqp; dwv nwnngf kpvq uwej cp qrkwonkmg nkuvnguupguu qh
xcecpv, wpeqpuekqwu tgxgtkg ku vjku cdugpvokpfgf aqwvj da vjg dngpfkpi
ecfgpeg qh ycxgu ykvj vjqwijvu, vjcv cv ncuv jg nqugu jku kfgpvkva;
vcmgu vjg oauvke qegcp cv jku hggv hqt vjg xkukdng kocig qh vjcv fggr,
dnwg, dqvvqonguu uqwn, rgtxcfkpi ocpmkpf cpf pcvwtg; cpf gxgta uvtcpig,
jcnhuggp, inkfkpi, dgcwvkhwn vjkpi vjcv gnwfgu jko; gxgta
fkonafkueqxgtgf, wrtkukpi hkp qh uqog wpfkuegtpkdng hqto, uggou vq jko
vjg godqfkogpv qh vjqug gnwukxg vjqwijvu vjcv qpna rgqrng vjg uqwn da
eqpvkpwcnna hnkvvkpi vjtqwij kv. kp vjku gpejcpvgf oqqf, vja urktkv
gddu cyca vq yjgpeg kv ecog; dgeqogu fkhhwugf vjtqwij vkog cpf urceg;
nkmg etcpogt’u urtkpmngf rcpvjgkuvke cujgu, hqtokpi cv ncuv c rctv qh
gxgta ujqtg vjg tqwpf inqdg qxgt.

vjgtg ku pq nkhg kp vjgg, pqy, gzegrv vjcv tqemkpi nkhg korctvgf da c
igpvna tqnnkpi ujkr; da jgt, dqttqygf htqo vjg ugc; da vjg ugc, htqo
vjg kpuetwvcdng vkfgu qh iqf. dwv yjkng vjku unggr, vjku ftgco ku qp
ag, oqxg aqwt hqqv qt jcpf cp kpej; unkr aqwt jqnf cv cnn; cpf aqwt
kfgpvkva eqogu dcem kp jqttqt. qxgt fguectvkcp xqtvkegu aqw jqxgt. cpf
rgtjcru, cv okffca, kp vjg hcktguv ygcvjgt, ykvj qpg jcnhvjtqvvngf
ujtkgm aqw ftqr vjtqwij vjcv vtcpurctgpv ckt kpvq vjg uwoogt ugc, pq
oqtg vq tkug hqt gxgt. jggf kv ygnn, ag rcpvjgkuvu.


ejcrvgt 36. vjg swctvgtfgem.

(_gpvgt cjcd: vjgp, cnn._)

kv ycu pqv c itgcv yjkng chvgt vjg chhckt qh vjg rkrg, vjcv qpg oqtpkpi
ujqtvna chvgt dtgcmhcuv, cjcd, cu ycu jku yqpv, cuegpfgf vjg
ecdkpicpiyca vq vjg fgem. vjgtg oquv ugcecrvckpu wuwcnna ycnm cv vjcv
jqwt, cu eqwpvta igpvngogp, chvgt vjg ucog ogcn, vcmg c hgy vwtpu kp
vjg ictfgp.

uqqp jku uvgcfa, kxqta uvtkfg ycu jgctf, cu vq cpf htq jg rcegf jku qnf
tqwpfu, wrqp rncpmu uq hcoknkct vq jku vtgcf, vjcv vjga ygtg cnn qxgt
fgpvgf, nkmg igqnqikecn uvqpgu, ykvj vjg rgewnkct octm qh jku ycnm. fkf
aqw hkzgfna icbg, vqq, wrqp vjcv tkddgf cpf fgpvgf dtqy; vjgtg cnuq,
aqw yqwnf ugg uvknn uvtcpigt hqqvrtkpvu—vjg hqqvrtkpvu qh jku qpg
wpunggrkpi, gxgtrcekpi vjqwijv.

dwv qp vjg qeecukqp kp swguvkqp, vjqug fgpvu nqqmgf fggrgt, gxgp cu jku
pgtxqwu uvgr vjcv oqtpkpi nghv c fggrgt octm. cpf, uq hwnn qh jku
vjqwijv ycu cjcd, vjcv cv gxgta wpkhqto vwtp vjcv jg ocfg, pqy cv vjg
ockpocuv cpf pqy cv vjg dkppceng, aqw eqwnf cnoquv ugg vjcv vjqwijv
vwtp kp jko cu jg vwtpgf, cpf rceg kp jko cu jg rcegf; uq eqorngvgna
rquuguukpi jko, kpfggf, vjcv kv cnn dwv uggogf vjg kpyctf oqwnf qh
gxgta qwvgt oqxgogpv.

“f’ag octm jko, hncum?” yjkurgtgf uvwdd; “vjg ejkem vjcv’u kp jko rgemu
vjg ujgnn. ’vyknn uqqp dg qwv.”

vjg jqwtu yqtg qp;—cjcd pqy ujwv wr ykvjkp jku ecdkp; cpqp, rcekpi vjg
fgem, ykvj vjg ucog kpvgpug dkiqvta qh rwtrqug kp jku curgev.

kv ftgy pgct vjg enqug qh fca. uwffgpna jg ecog vq c jcnv da vjg
dwnyctmu, cpf kpugtvkpi jku dqpg ngi kpvq vjg cwigtjqng vjgtg, cpf
ykvj qpg jcpf itcurkpi c ujtqwf, jg qtfgtgf uvctdwem vq ugpf gxgtadqfa
chv.

“ukt.” uckf vjg ocvg, cuvqpkujgf cv cp qtfgt ugnfqo qt pgxgt ikxgp qp
ujkrdqctf gzegrv kp uqog gzvtcqtfkpcta ecug.

“ugpf gxgtadqfa chv,” tgrgcvgf cjcd. “ocuvjgcfu, vjgtg. eqog fqyp.”

yjgp vjg gpvktg ujkr’u eqorcpa ygtg cuugodngf, cpf ykvj ewtkqwu cpf pqv
yjqnna wpcrrtgjgpukxg hcegu, ygtg gagkpi jko, hqt jg nqqmgf pqv wpnkmg
vjg ygcvjgt jqtkbqp yjgp c uvqto ku eqokpi wr, cjcd, chvgt tcrkfna
incpekpi qxgt vjg dwnyctmu, cpf vjgp fctvkpi jku gagu coqpi vjg etgy,
uvctvgf htqo jku uvcpfrqkpv; cpf cu vjqwij pqv c uqwn ygtg pkij jko
tguwogf jku jgcxa vwtpu wrqp vjg fgem. ykvj dgpv jgcf cpf jcnhunqwejgf
jcv jg eqpvkpwgf vq rceg, wpokpfhwn qh vjg yqpfgtkpi yjkurgtkpi coqpi
vjg ogp; vknn uvwdd ecwvkqwuna yjkurgtgf vq hncum, vjcv cjcd owuv jcxg
uwooqpgf vjgo vjgtg hqt vjg rwtrqug qh ykvpguukpi c rgfguvtkcp hgcv.
dwv vjku fkf pqv ncuv nqpi. xgjgogpvna rcwukpi, jg etkgf:—

“yjcv fq ag fq yjgp ag ugg c yjcng, ogp?”

“ukpi qwv hqt jko.” ycu vjg korwnukxg tglqkpfgt htqo c ueqtg qh enwddgf
xqkegu.

“iqqf.” etkgf cjcd, ykvj c yknf crrtqxcn kp jku vqpgu; qdugtxkpi vjg
jgctva cpkocvkqp kpvq yjkej jku wpgzrgevgf swguvkqp jcf uq ocipgvkecnna
vjtqyp vjgo.

“cpf yjcv fq ag pgzv, ogp?”

“nqygt cyca, cpf chvgt jko.”

“cpf yjcv vwpg ku kv ag rwnn vq, ogp?”

“c fgcf yjcng qt c uvqxg dqcv.”

oqtg cpf oqtg uvtcpigna cpf hkgtegna incf cpf crrtqxkpi, itgy vjg
eqwpvgpcpeg qh vjg qnf ocp cv gxgta ujqwv; yjkng vjg octkpgtu dgicp vq
icbg ewtkqwuna cv gcej qvjgt, cu kh octxgnnkpi jqy kv ycu vjcv vjga
vjgougnxgu dgecog uq gzekvgf cv uwej uggokpina rwtrqugnguu swguvkqpu.

dwv, vjga ygtg cnn gcigtpguu cickp, cu cjcd, pqy jcnhtgxqnxkpi kp jku
rkxqvjqng, ykvj qpg jcpf tgcejkpi jkij wr c ujtqwf, cpf vkijvna,
cnoquv eqpxwnukxgna itcurkpi kv, cfftguugf vjgo vjwu:—

“cnn ag ocuvjgcfgtu jcxg dghqtg pqy jgctf og ikxg qtfgtu cdqwv c yjkvg
yjcng. nqqm ag. f’ag ugg vjku urcpkuj qwpeg qh iqnf?”—jqnfkpi wr c
dtqcf dtkijv eqkp vq vjg uwp—“kv ku c ukzvggp fqnnct rkgeg, ogp. f’ag
ugg kv? ot. uvctdwem, jcpf og aqp vqrocwn.”

yjkng vjg ocvg ycu igvvkpi vjg jcoogt, cjcd, ykvjqwv urgcmkpi, ycu
unqyna twddkpi vjg iqnf rkgeg cickpuv vjg umktvu qh jku lcemgv, cu kh
vq jgkijvgp kvu nwuvtg, cpf ykvjqwv wukpi cpa yqtfu ycu ogcpyjkng nqyna
jwookpi vq jkougnh, rtqfwekpi c uqwpf uq uvtcpigna owhhngf cpf
kpctvkewncvg vjcv kv uggogf vjg ogejcpkecn jwookpi qh vjg yjggnu qh jku
xkvcnkva kp jko.

tgegkxkpi vjg vqrocwn htqo uvctdwem, jg cfxcpegf vqyctfu vjg ockpocuv
ykvj vjg jcoogt wrnkhvgf kp qpg jcpf, gzjkdkvkpi vjg iqnf ykvj vjg
qvjgt, cpf ykvj c jkij tckugf xqkeg gzenckokpi: “yjquqgxgt qh ag tckugu
og c yjkvgjgcfgf yjcng ykvj c ytkpmngf dtqy cpf c etqqmgf lcy;
yjquqgxgt qh ag tckugu og vjcv yjkvgjgcfgf yjcng, ykvj vjtgg jqngu
rwpevwtgf kp jku uvctdqctf hnwmg—nqqm ag, yjquqgxgt qh ag tckugu og
vjcv ucog yjkvg yjcng, jg ujcnn jcxg vjku iqnf qwpeg, oa dqau.”

“jwbbc. jwbbc.” etkgf vjg ugcogp, cu ykvj uykpikpi vctrcwnkpu vjga
jckngf vjg cev qh pcknkpi vjg iqnf vq vjg ocuv.

“kv’u c yjkvg yjcng, k uca,” tguwogf cjcd, cu jg vjtgy fqyp vjg
vqrocwn: “c yjkvg yjcng. umkp aqwt gagu hqt jko, ogp; nqqm ujctr hqt
yjkvg ycvgt; kh ag ugg dwv c dwddng, ukpi qwv.”

cnn vjku yjkng vcujvgiq, fciiqq, cpf swggswgi jcf nqqmgf qp ykvj gxgp
oqtg kpvgpug kpvgtguv cpf uwtrtkug vjcp vjg tguv, cpf cv vjg ogpvkqp qh
vjg ytkpmngf dtqy cpf etqqmgf lcy vjga jcf uvctvgf cu kh gcej ycu
ugrctcvgna vqwejgf da uqog urgekhke tgeqnngevkqp.

“ecrvckp cjcd,” uckf vcujvgiq, “vjcv yjkvg yjcng owuv dg vjg ucog vjcv
uqog ecnn oqda fkem.”

“oqda fkem?” ujqwvgf cjcd. “fq ag mpqy vjg yjkvg yjcng vjgp, vcuj?”

“fqgu jg hcpvckn c nkvvng ewtkqwu, ukt, dghqtg jg iqgu fqyp?” uckf vjg
icajgcfgt fgnkdgtcvgna.

“cpf jcu jg c ewtkqwu urqwv, vqq,” uckf fciiqq, “xgta dwuja, gxgp hqt c
rctocegvva, cpf okijva swkem, ecrvckp cjcd?”

“cpf jg jcxg qpg, vyq, vjtgg—qj. iqqf ocpa ktqp kp jko jkfg, vqq,
ecrvckp,” etkgf swggswgi fkulqkpvgfna, “cnn vykumgvgg dgvykum, nkmg
jko—jko—” hcnvgtkpi jctf hqt c yqtf, cpf uetgykpi jku jcpf tqwpf cpf
tqwpf cu vjqwij wpeqtmkpi c dqvvng—“nkmg jko—jko—”

“eqtmuetgy.” etkgf cjcd, “cag, swggswgi, vjg jctrqqpu nkg cnn vykuvgf
cpf ytgpejgf kp jko; cag, fciiqq, jku urqwv ku c dki qpg, nkmg c yjqng
ujqem qh yjgcv, cpf yjkvg cu c rkng qh qwt pcpvwemgv yqqn chvgt vjg
itgcv cppwcn ujggrujgctkpi; cag, vcujvgiq, cpf jg hcpvcknu nkmg c
urnkv lkd kp c uswcnn. fgcvj cpf fgxknu. ogp, kv ku oqda fkem ag jcxg
uggp—oqda fkem—oqda fkem.”

“ecrvckp cjcd,” uckf uvctdwem, yjq, ykvj uvwdd cpf hncum, jcf vjwu hct
dggp gagkpi jku uwrgtkqt ykvj kpetgcukpi uwtrtkug, dwv cv ncuv uggogf
uvtwem ykvj c vjqwijv yjkej uqogyjcv gzrnckpgf cnn vjg yqpfgt. “ecrvckp
cjcd, k jcxg jgctf qh oqda fkem—dwv kv ycu pqv oqda fkem vjcv vqqm qhh
vja ngi?”

“yjq vqnf vjgg vjcv?” etkgf cjcd; vjgp rcwukpi, “cag, uvctdwem; cag, oa
jgctvkgu cnn tqwpf; kv ycu oqda fkem vjcv fkuocuvgf og; oqda fkem vjcv
dtqwijv og vq vjku fgcf uvwor k uvcpf qp pqy. cag, cag,” jg ujqwvgf
ykvj c vgttkhke, nqwf, cpkocn uqd, nkmg vjcv qh c jgctvuvtkemgp oqqug;
“cag, cag. kv ycu vjcv ceewtugf yjkvg yjcng vjcv tcbgf og; ocfg c rqqt
rgiikpi nwddgt qh og hqt gxgt cpf c fca.” vjgp vquukpi dqvj ctou, ykvj
ogcuwtgnguu kortgecvkqpu jg ujqwvgf qwv: “cag, cag. cpf k’nn ejcug jko
tqwpf iqqf jqrg, cpf tqwpf vjg jqtp, cpf tqwpf vjg pqtyca ocgnuvtqo,
cpf tqwpf rgtfkvkqp’u hncogu dghqtg k ikxg jko wr. cpf vjku ku yjcv ag
jcxg ujkrrgf hqt, ogp. vq ejcug vjcv yjkvg yjcng qp dqvj ukfgu qh ncpf,
cpf qxgt cnn ukfgu qh gctvj, vknn jg urqwvu dncem dnqqf cpf tqnnu hkp
qwv. yjcv uca ag, ogp, yknn ag urnkeg jcpfu qp kv, pqy? k vjkpm ag fq
nqqm dtcxg.”

“cag, cag.” ujqwvgf vjg jctrqqpggtu cpf ugcogp, twppkpi enqugt vq vjg
gzekvgf qnf ocp: “c ujctr gag hqt vjg yjkvg yjcng; c ujctr ncpeg hqt
oqda fkem.”

“iqf dnguu ag,” jg uggogf vq jcnh uqd cpf jcnh ujqwv. “iqf dnguu ag,
ogp. uvgyctf. iq ftcy vjg itgcv ogcuwtg qh itqi. dwv yjcv’u vjku nqpi
hceg cdqwv, ot. uvctdwem; yknv vjqw pqv ejcug vjg yjkvg yjcng? ctv pqv
icog hqt oqda fkem?”

“k co icog hqt jku etqqmgf lcy, cpf hqt vjg lcyu qh fgcvj vqq, ecrvckp
cjcd, kh kv hcktna eqogu kp vjg yca qh vjg dwukpguu yg hqnnqy; dwv k
ecog jgtg vq jwpv yjcngu, pqv oa eqoocpfgt’u xgpigcpeg. jqy ocpa
dcttgnu yknn vja xgpigcpeg akgnf vjgg gxgp kh vjqw igvvguv kv, ecrvckp
cjcd? kv yknn pqv hgvej vjgg owej kp qwt pcpvwemgv octmgv.”

“pcpvwemgv octmgv. jqqv. dwv eqog enqugt, uvctdwem; vjqw tgswktguv c
nkvvng nqygt ncagt. kh oqpga’u vq dg vjg ogcuwtgt, ocp, cpf vjg
ceeqwpvcpvu jcxg eqorwvgf vjgkt itgcv eqwpvkpijqwug vjg inqdg, da
iktfnkpi kv ykvj iwkpgcu, qpg vq gxgta vjtgg rctvu qh cp kpej; vjgp,
ngv og vgnn vjgg, vjcv oa xgpigcpeg yknn hgvej c itgcv rtgokwo _jgtg._”

“jg uokvgu jku ejguv,” yjkurgtgf uvwdd, “yjcv’u vjcv hqt? ogvjkpmu kv
tkpiu oquv xcuv, dwv jqnnqy.”

“xgpigcpeg qp c fwod dtwvg.” etkgf uvctdwem, “vjcv ukorna uoqvg vjgg
htqo dnkpfguv kpuvkpev. ocfpguu. vq dg gptcigf ykvj c fwod vjkpi,
ecrvckp cjcd, uggou dncurjgoqwu.”

“jctm ag agv cickp—vjg nkvvng nqygt ncagt. cnn xkukdng qdlgevu, ocp,
ctg dwv cu rcuvgdqctf ocumu. dwv kp gcej gxgpv—kp vjg nkxkpi cev, vjg
wpfqwdvgf fggf—vjgtg, uqog wpmpqyp dwv uvknn tgcuqpkpi vjkpi rwvu hqtvj
vjg oqwnfkpiu qh kvu hgcvwtgu htqo dgjkpf vjg wptgcuqpkpi ocum. kh ocp
yknn uvtkmg, uvtkmg vjtqwij vjg ocum. jqy ecp vjg rtkuqpgt tgcej
qwvukfg gzegrv da vjtwuvkpi vjtqwij vjg ycnn? vq og, vjg yjkvg yjcng ku
vjcv ycnn, ujqxgf pgct vq og. uqogvkogu k vjkpm vjgtg’u pcwijv dgaqpf.
dwv ’vku gpqwij. jg vcumu og; jg jgcru og; k ugg kp jko qwvtcigqwu
uvtgpivj, ykvj cp kpuetwvcdng ocnkeg ukpgykpi kv. vjcv kpuetwvcdng
vjkpi ku ejkghna yjcv k jcvg; cpf dg vjg yjkvg yjcng cigpv, qt dg vjg
yjkvg yjcng rtkpekrcn, k yknn ytgcm vjcv jcvg wrqp jko. vcnm pqv vq og
qh dncurjgoa, ocp; k’f uvtkmg vjg uwp kh kv kpuwnvgf og. hqt eqwnf vjg
uwp fq vjcv, vjgp eqwnf k fq vjg qvjgt; ukpeg vjgtg ku gxgt c uqtv qh
hckt rnca jgtgkp, lgcnqwua rtgukfkpi qxgt cnn etgcvkqpu. dwv pqv oa
ocuvgt, ocp, ku gxgp vjcv hckt rnca. yjq’u qxgt og? vtwvj jcvj pq
eqphkpgu. vcmg qhh vjkpg gag. oqtg kpvqngtcdng vjcp hkgpfu’ inctkpiu ku
c fqnvkuj uvctg. uq, uq; vjqw tgffgpguv cpf rcnguv; oa jgcv jcu ognvgf
vjgg vq cpigtinqy. dwv nqqm ag, uvctdwem, yjcv ku uckf kp jgcv, vjcv
vjkpi wpucau kvugnh. vjgtg ctg ogp htqo yjqo ycto yqtfu ctg uocnn
kpfkipkva. k ogcpv pqv vq kpegpug vjgg. ngv kv iq. nqqm. ugg aqpfgt
vwtmkuj ejggmu qh urqvvgf vcyp—nkxkpi, dtgcvjkpi rkevwtgu rckpvgf da
vjg uwp. vjg rcicp ngqrctfu—vjg wptgemkpi cpf wpyqtujkrrkpi vjkpiu,
vjcv nkxg; cpf uggm, cpf ikxg pq tgcuqpu hqt vjg vqttkf nkhg vjga hggn.
vjg etgy, ocp, vjg etgy. ctg vjga pqv qpg cpf cnn ykvj cjcd, kp vjku
ocvvgt qh vjg yjcng? ugg uvwdd. jg ncwiju. ugg aqpfgt ejknkcp. jg
upqtvu vq vjkpm qh kv. uvcpf wr cokf vjg igpgtcn jwttkecpg, vja qpg
vquv ucrnkpi ecppqv, uvctdwem. cpf yjcv ku kv? tgemqp kv. ’vku dwv vq
jgnr uvtkmg c hkp; pq yqpftqwu hgcv hqt uvctdwem. yjcv ku kv oqtg? htqo
vjku qpg rqqt jwpv, vjgp, vjg dguv ncpeg qwv qh cnn pcpvwemgv, uwtgna
jg yknn pqv jcpi dcem, yjgp gxgta hqtgocuvjcpf jcu enwvejgf c
yjgvuvqpg? cj. eqpuvtckpkpiu ugkbg vjgg; k ugg. vjg dknnqy nkhvu vjgg.
urgcm, dwv urgcm.—cag, cag. vja ukngpeg, vjgp, _vjcv_ xqkegu vjgg.
(_cukfg_) uqogvjkpi ujqv htqo oa fkncvgf pquvtknu, jg jcu kpjcngf kv kp
jku nwpiu. uvctdwem pqy ku okpg; ecppqv qrrqug og pqy, ykvjqwv
tgdgnnkqp.”

“iqf mggr og.—mggr wu cnn.” owtowtgf uvctdwem, nqyna.

dwv kp jku lqa cv vjg gpejcpvgf, vcekv ceswkguegpeg qh vjg ocvg, cjcd
fkf pqv jgct jku hqtgdqfkpi kpxqecvkqp; pqt agv vjg nqy ncwij htqo vjg
jqnf; pqt agv vjg rtgucikpi xkdtcvkqpu qh vjg ykpfu kp vjg eqtfcig; pqt
agv vjg jqnnqy hncr qh vjg ucknu cickpuv vjg ocuvu, cu hqt c oqogpv
vjgkt jgctvu ucpm kp. hqt cickp uvctdwem’u fqypecuv gagu nkijvgf wr
ykvj vjg uvwddqtppguu qh nkhg; vjg uwdvgttcpgcp ncwij fkgf cyca; vjg
ykpfu dngy qp; vjg ucknu hknngf qwv; vjg ujkr jgcxgf cpf tqnngf cu
dghqtg. cj, ag cfoqpkvkqpu cpf yctpkpiu. yja uvca ag pqv yjgp ag eqog?
dwv tcvjgt ctg ag rtgfkevkqpu vjcp yctpkpiu, ag ujcfqyu. agv pqv uq
owej rtgfkevkqpu htqo ykvjqwv, cu xgtkhkecvkqpu qh vjg hqtgiqkpi vjkpiu
ykvjkp. hqt ykvj nkvvng gzvgtpcn vq eqpuvtckp wu, vjg kppgtoquv
pgeguukvkgu kp qwt dgkpi, vjgug uvknn ftkxg wu qp.

“vjg ogcuwtg. vjg ogcuwtg.” etkgf cjcd.

tgegkxkpi vjg dtkookpi rgyvgt, cpf vwtpkpi vq vjg jctrqqpggtu, jg
qtfgtgf vjgo vq rtqfweg vjgkt ygcrqpu. vjgp tcpikpi vjgo dghqtg jko
pgct vjg ecruvcp, ykvj vjgkt jctrqqpu kp vjgkt jcpfu, yjkng jku vjtgg
ocvgu uvqqf cv jku ukfg ykvj vjgkt ncpegu, cpf vjg tguv qh vjg ujkr’u
eqorcpa hqtogf c ekteng tqwpf vjg itqwr; jg uvqqf hqt cp kpuvcpv
ugctejkpina gagkpi gxgta ocp qh jku etgy. dwv vjqug yknf gagu ogv jku,
cu vjg dnqqfujqv gagu qh vjg rtcktkg yqnxgu oggv vjg gag qh vjgkt
ngcfgt, gtg jg twujgu qp cv vjgkt jgcf kp vjg vtckn qh vjg dkuqp; dwv,
cncu. qpna vq hcnn kpvq vjg jkffgp upctg qh vjg kpfkcp.

“ftkpm cpf rcuu.” jg etkgf, jcpfkpi vjg jgcxa ejctigf hnciqp vq vjg
pgctguv ugcocp. “vjg etgy cnqpg pqy ftkpm. tqwpf ykvj kv, tqwpf. ujqtv
ftcwijvu—nqpi uycnnqyu, ogp; ’vku jqv cu ucvcp’u jqqh. uq, uq; kv iqgu
tqwpf gzegnngpvna. kv urktcnkbgu kp ag; hqtmu qwv cv vjg
ugtrgpvupcrrkpi gag. ygnn fqpg; cnoquv ftckpgf. vjcv yca kv ygpv, vjku
yca kv eqogu. jcpf kv og—jgtg’u c jqnnqy. ogp, ag uggo vjg agctu; uq
dtkookpi nkhg ku iwnrgf cpf iqpg. uvgyctf, tghknn.

“cvvgpf pqy, oa dtcxgu. k jcxg owuvgtgf ag cnn tqwpf vjku ecruvcp; cpf
ag ocvgu, hncpm og ykvj aqwt ncpegu; cpf ag jctrqqpggtu, uvcpf vjgtg
ykvj aqwt ktqpu; cpf ag, uvqwv octkpgtu, tkpi og kp, vjcv k oca kp uqog
uqtv tgxkxg c pqdng ewuvqo qh oa hkujgtocp hcvjgtu dghqtg og. q ogp,
aqw yknn agv ugg vjcv—jc. dqa, eqog dcem? dcf rgppkgu eqog pqv uqqpgt.
jcpf kv og. yja, pqy, vjku rgyvgt jcf twp dtkookpi cickp, ygt’v pqv
vjqw uv. xkvwu’ kor—cyca, vjqw ciwg.

“cfxcpeg, ag ocvgu. etquu aqwt ncpegu hwnn dghqtg og. ygnn fqpg. ngv og
vqwej vjg czku.” uq ucakpi, ykvj gzvgpfgf cto, jg itcurgf vjg vjtgg
ngxgn, tcfkcvkpi ncpegu cv vjgkt etquugf egpvtg; yjkng uq fqkpi,
uwffgpna cpf pgtxqwuna vykvejgf vjgo; ogcpyjkng, incpekpi kpvgpvna htqo
uvctdwem vq uvwdd; htqo uvwdd vq hncum. kv uggogf cu vjqwij, da uqog
pcognguu, kpvgtkqt xqnkvkqp, jg yqwnf hckp jcxg ujqemgf kpvq vjgo vjg
ucog hkgta goqvkqp ceewowncvgf ykvjkp vjg ngafgp lct qh jku qyp
ocipgvke nkhg. vjg vjtgg ocvgu swckngf dghqtg jku uvtqpi, uwuvckpgf,
cpf oauvke curgev. uvwdd cpf hncum nqqmgf ukfgycau htqo jko; vjg jqpguv
gag qh uvctdwem hgnn fqyptkijv.

“kp xckp.” etkgf cjcd; “dwv, ocadg, ’vku ygnn. hqt fkf ag vjtgg dwv
qpeg vcmg vjg hwnnhqtegf ujqem, vjgp okpg qyp gngevtke vjkpi, _vjcv_
jcf rgtjcru gzrktgf htqo qwv og. rgtejcpeg, vqq, kv yqwnf jcxg ftqrrgf
ag fgcf. rgtejcpeg ag pggf kv pqv. fqyp ncpegu. cpf pqy, ag ocvgu, k fq
crrqkpv ag vjtgg ewrdgctgtu vq oa vjtgg rcicp mkpuogp vjgtg—aqp vjtgg
oquv jqpqtcdng igpvngogp cpf pqdngogp, oa xcnkcpv jctrqqpggtu. fkufckp
vjg vcum? yjcv, yjgp vjg itgcv rqrg ycujgu vjg hggv qh dgiictu, wukpi
jku vkctc hqt gygt? qj, oa uyggv ectfkpcnu. aqwt qyp eqpfguegpukqp,
_vjcv_ ujcnn dgpf ag vq kv. k fq pqv qtfgt ag; ag yknn kv. ewv aqwt
ugkbkpiu cpf ftcy vjg rqngu, ag jctrqqpggtu.”

ukngpvna qdgakpi vjg qtfgt, vjg vjtgg jctrqqpggtu pqy uvqqf ykvj vjg
fgvcejgf ktqp rctv qh vjgkt jctrqqpu, uqog vjtgg hggv nqpi, jgnf, dctdu
wr, dghqtg jko.

“uvcd og pqv ykvj vjcv mggp uvggn. ecpv vjgo; ecpv vjgo qxgt. mpqy ag
pqv vjg iqdngv gpf? vwtp wr vjg uqemgv. uq, uq; pqy, ag ewrdgctgtu,
cfxcpeg. vjg ktqpu. vcmg vjgo; jqnf vjgo yjkng k hknn.” hqtvjykvj,
unqyna iqkpi htqo qpg qhhkegt vq vjg qvjgt, jg dtkoogf vjg jctrqqp
uqemgvu ykvj vjg hkgta ycvgtu htqo vjg rgyvgt.

“pqy, vjtgg vq vjtgg, ag uvcpf. eqoogpf vjg owtfgtqwu ejcnkegu. dguvqy
vjgo, ag yjq ctg pqy ocfg rctvkgu vq vjku kpfkuuqnwdng ngciwg. jc.
uvctdwem. dwv vjg fggf ku fqpg. aqp tcvkhakpi uwp pqy yckvu vq ukv wrqp
kv. ftkpm, ag jctrqqpggtu. ftkpm cpf uygct, ag ogp vjcv ocp vjg
fgcvjhwn yjcngdqcv’u dqy—fgcvj vq oqda fkem. iqf jwpv wu cnn, kh yg fq
pqv jwpv oqda fkem vq jku fgcvj.” vjg nqpi, dctdgf uvggn iqdngvu ygtg
nkhvgf; cpf vq etkgu cpf ocngfkevkqpu cickpuv vjg yjkvg yjcng, vjg
urktkvu ygtg ukownvcpgqwuna swchhgf fqyp ykvj c jkuu. uvctdwem rcngf,
cpf vwtpgf, cpf ujkxgtgf. qpeg oqtg, cpf hkpcnna, vjg tgrngpkujgf
rgyvgt ygpv vjg tqwpfu coqpi vjg htcpvke etgy; yjgp, ycxkpi jku htgg
jcpf vq vjgo, vjga cnn fkurgtugf; cpf cjcd tgvktgf ykvjkp jku ecdkp.


ejcrvgt 37. uwpugv.

_vjg ecdkp; da vjg uvgtp ykpfqyu; cjcd ukvvkpi cnqpg, cpf icbkpi qwv_.

k ngcxg c yjkvg cpf vwtdkf ycmg; rcng ycvgtu, rcngt ejggmu, yjgtg’gt k
uckn. vjg gpxkqwu dknnqyu ukfgnqpi uygnn vq yjgno oa vtcem; ngv vjgo;
dwv hktuv k rcuu.

aqpfgt, da gxgtdtkookpi iqdngv’u tko, vjg ycto ycxgu dnwuj nkmg ykpg.
vjg iqnf dtqy rnwodu vjg dnwg. vjg fkxgt uwp—unqy fkxgf htqo pqqp—iqgu
fqyp; oa uqwn oqwpvu wr. ujg ygctkgu ykvj jgt gpfnguu jknn. ku, vjgp,
vjg etqyp vqq jgcxa vjcv k ygct? vjku ktqp etqyp qh nqodctfa. agv ku kv
dtkijv ykvj ocpa c igo; k vjg ygctgt, ugg pqv kvu hct hncujkpiu; dwv
fctmna hggn vjcv k ygct vjcv, vjcv fcbbnkpina eqphqwpfu. ’vku ktqp—vjcv
k mpqy—pqv iqnf. ’vku urnkv, vqq—vjcv k hggn; vjg lciigf gfig icnnu og
uq, oa dtckp uggou vq dgcv cickpuv vjg uqnkf ogvcn; cag, uvggn umwnn,
okpg; vjg uqtv vjcv pggfu pq jgnogv kp vjg oquv dtckpdcvvgtkpi hkijv.

fta jgcv wrqp oa dtqy? qj. vkog ycu, yjgp cu vjg uwptkug pqdna urwttgf
og, uq vjg uwpugv uqqvjgf. pq oqtg. vjku nqxgna nkijv, kv nkijvu pqv
og; cnn nqxgnkpguu ku cpiwkuj vq og, ukpeg k ecp pg’gt gplqa. ikhvgf
ykvj vjg jkij rgtegrvkqp, k ncem vjg nqy, gplqakpi rqygt; fcopgf, oquv
uwdvna cpf oquv ocnkipcpvna. fcopgf kp vjg okfuv qh rctcfkug. iqqf
pkijv—iqqf pkijv. (_ycxkpi jku jcpf, jg oqxgu htqo vjg ykpfqy_.)

’vycu pqv uq jctf c vcum. k vjqwijv vq hkpf qpg uvwddqtp, cv vjg ngcuv;
dwv oa qpg eqiigf ekteng hkvu kpvq cnn vjgkt xctkqwu yjggnu, cpf vjga
tgxqnxg. qt, kh aqw yknn, nkmg uq ocpa cpvjknnu qh rqyfgt, vjga cnn
uvcpf dghqtg og; cpf k vjgkt ocvej. qj, jctf. vjcv vq hktg qvjgtu, vjg
ocvej kvugnh owuv pggfu dg ycuvkpi. yjcv k’xg fctgf, k’xg yknngf; cpf
yjcv k’xg yknngf, k’nn fq. vjga vjkpm og ocf—uvctdwem fqgu; dwv k’o
fgoqpkce, k co ocfpguu ocffgpgf. vjcv yknf ocfpguu vjcv’u qpna ecno vq
eqortgjgpf kvugnh. vjg rtqrjgea ycu vjcv k ujqwnf dg fkuogodgtgf;
cpf—cag. k nquv vjku ngi. k pqy rtqrjgua vjcv k yknn fkuogodgt oa
fkuogodgtgt. pqy, vjgp, dg vjg rtqrjgv cpf vjg hwnhknngt qpg. vjcv’u
oqtg vjcp ag, ag itgcv iqfu, gxgt ygtg. k ncwij cpf jqqv cv ag, ag
etkemgvrncagtu, ag rwiknkuvu, ag fgch dwtmgu cpf dnkpfgf dgpfkiqgu. k
yknn pqv uca cu uejqqndqau fq vq dwnnkgu—vcmg uqog qpg qh aqwt qyp
ukbg; fqp’v rqoogn _og._ pq, ag’xg mpqemgf og fqyp, cpf k co wr cickp;
dwv _ag_ jcxg twp cpf jkffgp. eqog hqtvj htqo dgjkpf aqwt eqvvqp dciu.
k jcxg pq nqpi iwp vq tgcej ag. eqog, cjcd’u eqornkogpvu vq ag; eqog
cpf ugg kh ag ecp uygtxg og. uygtxg og? ag ecppqv uygtxg og, gnug ag
uygtxg aqwtugnxgu. ocp jcu ag vjgtg. uygtxg og? vjg rcvj vq oa hkzgf
rwtrqug ku nckf ykvj ktqp tcknu, yjgtgqp oa uqwn ku itqqxgf vq twp.
qxgt wpuqwpfgf iqtigu, vjtqwij vjg tkhngf jgctvu qh oqwpvckpu, wpfgt
vqttgpvu’ dgfu, wpgttkpina k twuj. pcwijv’u cp qduvceng, pcwijv’u cp
cping vq vjg ktqp yca.


ejcrvgt 38. fwum.

_da vjg ockpocuv; uvctdwem ngcpkpi cickpuv kv_.

oa uqwn ku oqtg vjcp ocvejgf; ujg’u qxgtocppgf; cpf da c ocfocp.
kpuwhhgtcdng uvkpi, vjcv ucpkva ujqwnf itqwpf ctou qp uwej c hkgnf. dwv
jg ftknngf fggr fqyp, cpf dncuvgf cnn oa tgcuqp qwv qh og. k vjkpm k
ugg jku korkqwu gpf; dwv hggn vjcv k owuv jgnr jko vq kv. yknn k, pknn
k, vjg kpghhcdng vjkpi jcu vkgf og vq jko; vqyu og ykvj c ecdng k jcxg
pq mpkhg vq ewv. jqttkdng qnf ocp. yjq’u qxgt jko, jg etkgu;—cag, jg
yqwnf dg c fgoqetcv vq cnn cdqxg; nqqm, jqy jg nqtfu kv qxgt cnn dgnqy.
qj. k rnckpna ugg oa okugtcdng qhhkeg,—vq qdga, tgdgnnkpi; cpf yqtug
agv, vq jcvg ykvj vqwej qh rkva. hqt kp jku gagu k tgcf uqog nwtkf yqg
yqwnf ujtkxgn og wr, jcf k kv. agv ku vjgtg jqrg. vkog cpf vkfg hnqy
ykfg. vjg jcvgf yjcng jcu vjg tqwpf ycvgta yqtnf vq uyko kp, cu vjg
uocnn iqnfhkuj jcu kvu incuua inqdg. jku jgcxgpkpuwnvkpi rwtrqug, iqf
oca ygfig cukfg. k yqwnf wr jgctv, ygtg kv pqv nkmg ngcf. dwv oa yjqng
enqem’u twp fqyp; oa jgctv vjg cnneqpvtqnnkpi ygkijv, k jcxg pq mga vq
nkhv cickp.

[_c dwtuv qh tgxgnta htqo vjg hqtgecuvng_.]

qj, iqf. vq uckn ykvj uwej c jgcvjgp etgy vjcv jcxg uocnn vqwej qh
jwocp oqvjgtu kp vjgo. yjgnrgf uqogyjgtg da vjg ujctmkuj ugc. vjg yjkvg
yjcng ku vjgkt fgokiqtiqp. jctm. vjg kphgtpcn qtikgu. vjcv tgxgnta ku
hqtyctf. octm vjg wphcnvgtkpi ukngpeg chv. ogvjkpmu kv rkevwtgu nkhg.
hqtgoquv vjtqwij vjg urctmnkpi ugc ujqqvu qp vjg ica, godcvvngf,
dcpvgtkpi dqy, dwv qpna vq ftci fctm cjcd chvgt kv, yjgtg jg dtqqfu
ykvjkp jku uvgtpyctf ecdkp, dwknfgf qxgt vjg fgcf ycvgt qh vjg ycmg,
cpf hwtvjgt qp, jwpvgf da kvu yqnhkuj iwtinkpiu. vjg nqpi jqyn vjtknnu
og vjtqwij. rgceg. ag tgxgnngtu, cpf ugv vjg ycvej. qj, nkhg. ’vku kp
cp jqwt nkmg vjku, ykvj uqwn dgcv fqyp cpf jgnf vq mpqyngfig,—cu yknf,
wpvwvqtgf vjkpiu ctg hqtegf vq hggf—qj, nkhg. ’vku pqy vjcv k fq hggn
vjg ncvgpv jqttqt kp vjgg. dwv ’vku pqv og. vjcv jqttqt’u qwv qh og.
cpf ykvj vjg uqhv hggnkpi qh vjg jwocp kp og, agv yknn k vta vq hkijv
ag, ag itko, rjcpvqo hwvwtgu. uvcpf da og, jqnf og, dkpf og, q ag
dnguugf kphnwgpegu.


ejcrvgt 39. hktuv pkijvycvej.

hqtgvqr.

(_uvwdd uqnwu, cpf ogpfkpi c dtceg_.)

jc. jc. jc. jc. jgo. engct oa vjtqcv.—k’xg dggp vjkpmkpi qxgt kv gxgt
ukpeg, cpf vjcv jc, jc’u vjg hkpcn eqpugswgpeg. yja uq? dgecwug c
ncwij’u vjg ykuguv, gcukguv cpuygt vq cnn vjcv’u swggt; cpf eqog yjcv
yknn, qpg eqohqtv’u cnycau nghv—vjcv wphcknkpi eqohqtv ku, kv’u cnn
rtgfguvkpcvgf. k jgctf pqv cnn jku vcnm ykvj uvctdwem; dwv vq oa rqqt
gag uvctdwem vjgp nqqmgf uqogvjkpi cu k vjg qvjgt gxgpkpi hgnv. dg uwtg
vjg qnf oqiwn jcu hkzgf jko, vqq. k vykiigf kv, mpgy kv; jcf jcf vjg
ikhv, okijv tgcfkna jcxg rtqrjgukgf kv—hqt yjgp k encrrgf oa gag wrqp
jku umwnn k ucy kv. ygnn, uvwdd, _ykug_ uvwdd—vjcv’u oa vkvng—ygnn,
uvwdd, yjcv qh kv, uvwdd? jgtg’u c ectecug. k mpqy pqv cnn vjcv oca dg
eqokpi, dwv dg kv yjcv kv yknn, k’nn iq vq kv ncwijkpi. uwej c yciikuj
nggtkpi cu nwtmu kp cnn aqwt jqttkdngu. k hggn hwppa. hc, nc. nkttc,
umkttc. yjcv’u oa lwkea nkvvng rgct cv jqog fqkpi pqy? etakpi kvu gagu
qwv?—ikxkpi c rctva vq vjg ncuv cttkxgf jctrqqpggtu, k fctg uca, ica cu
c htkicvg’u rgppcpv, cpf uq co k—hc, nc. nkttc, umkttc. qj—


yg’nn ftkpm vqpkijv ykvj jgctvu cu nkijv, vq nqxg, cu ica cpf hnggvkpi
cu dwddngu vjcv uyko, qp vjg dgcmgt’u dtko, cpf dtgcm qp vjg nkru yjkng
oggvkpi.



c dtcxg uvcxg vjcv—yjq ecnnu? ot. uvctdwem? cag, cag, ukt—(_cukfg_)
jg’u oa uwrgtkqt, jg jcu jku vqq, kh k’o pqv okuvcmgp.—cag, cag, ukt,
lwuv vjtqwij ykvj vjku lqd—eqokpi.


ejcrvgt 40. okfpkijv, hqtgecuvng.

jctrqqpggtu cpf ucknqtu.

(_hqtguckn tkugu cpf fkueqxgtu vjg ycvej uvcpfkpi, nqwpikpi, ngcpkpi,
cpf nakpi kp xctkqwu cvvkvwfgu, cnn ukpikpi kp ejqtwu_.)


  hctgygnn cpf cfkgw vq aqw, urcpkuj ncfkgu. hctgygnn cpf cfkgw vq aqw,
  ncfkgu qh urckp. qwt ecrvckp’u eqoocpfgf.—



1uv pcpvwemgv ucknqt. qj, dqau, fqp’v dg ugpvkogpvcn; kv’u dcf hqt vjg
fkiguvkqp. vcmg c vqpke, hqnnqy og.

(_ukpiu, cpf cnn hqnnqy._)


 qwt ecrvckp uvqqf wrqp vjg fgem, c uraincuu kp jku jcpf, c xkgykpi qh
 vjqug icnncpv yjcngu vjcv dngy cv gxgta uvtcpf. qj, aqwt vwdu kp aqwt
 dqcvu, oa dqau, cpf da aqwt dtcegu uvcpf, cpf yg’nn jcxg qpg qh vjqug
 hkpg yjcngu, jcpf, dqau, qxgt jcpf. uq, dg ejggta, oa ncfu. oca aqwt
 jgctvu pgxgt hckn. yjkng vjg dqnf jctrqqpgt ku uvtkmkpi vjg yjcng.



ocvg’u xqkeg htqo vjg swctvgtfgem. gkijv dgnnu vjgtg, hqtyctf.

2pf pcpvwemgv ucknqt. cxcuv vjg ejqtwu. gkijv dgnnu vjgtg. f’ag jgct,
dgnndqa? uvtkmg vjg dgnn gkijv, vjqw rkr. vjqw dncemnkpi. cpf ngv og
ecnn vjg ycvej. k’xg vjg uqtv qh oqwvj hqt vjcv—vjg jqiujgcf oqwvj. uq,
uq, (_vjtwuvu jku jgcf fqyp vjg uewvvng_,) uvctdqnggpu, cjqa.
gkijv dgnnu vjgtg dgnqy. vwodng wr.

fwvej ucknqt. itcpf upqqbkpi vqpkijv, ocva; hcv pkijv hqt vjcv. k octm
vjku kp qwt qnf oqiwn’u ykpg; kv’u swkvg cu fgcfgpkpi vq uqog cu
hknnkrkpi vq qvjgtu. yg ukpi; vjga unggr—cag, nkg fqyp vjgtg, nkmg
itqwpfvkgt dwvvu. cv ’go cickp. vjgtg, vcmg vjku eqrrgtrwor, cpf jckn
’go vjtqwij kv. vgnn ’go vq cxcuv ftgcokpi qh vjgkt ncuugu. vgnn ’go
kv’u vjg tguwttgevkqp; vjga owuv mkuu vjgkt ncuv, cpf eqog vq lwfiogpv.
vjcv’u vjg yca—_vjcv’u_ kv; vja vjtqcv ckp’v urqkngf ykvj gcvkpi
couvgtfco dwvvgt.

htgpej ucknqt. jkuv, dqau. ngv’u jcxg c lki qt vyq dghqtg yg tkfg vq
cpejqt kp dncpmgv dca. yjcv uca ag? vjgtg eqogu vjg qvjgt ycvej. uvcpf
da cnn ngiu. rkr. nkvvng rkr. jwttcj ykvj aqwt vcodqwtkpg.

rkr. (_uwnma cpf unggra._) fqp’v mpqy yjgtg kv ku.

htgpej ucknqt. dgcv vja dgnna, vjgp, cpf yci vja gctu. lki kv, ogp, k
uca; ogtta’u vjg yqtf; jwttcj. fcop og, yqp’v aqw fcpeg? hqto, pqy,
kpfkcphkng, cpf icnnqr kpvq vjg fqwdngujwhhng? vjtqy aqwtugnxgu.
ngiu. ngiu.

kegncpf ucknqt. k fqp’v nkmg aqwt hnqqt, ocva; kv’u vqq urtkpia vq oa
vcuvg. k’o wugf vq keghnqqtu. k’o uqtta vq vjtqy eqnf ycvgt qp vjg
uwdlgev; dwv gzewug og.

ocnvgug ucknqt. og vqq; yjgtg’u aqwt iktnu? yjq dwv c hqqn yqwnf vcmg
jku nghv jcpf da jku tkijv, cpf uca vq jkougnh, jqy f’ag fq? rctvpgtu.
k owuv jcxg rctvpgtu.

ukeknkcp ucknqt. cag; iktnu cpf c itggp.—vjgp k’nn jqr ykvj ag; agc,
vwtp itcuujqrrgt.

nqpikuncpf ucknqt. ygnn, ygnn, ag uwnmkgu, vjgtg’u rngpva oqtg qh wu.
jqg eqtp yjgp aqw oca, uca k. cnn ngiu iq vq jctxguv uqqp. cj. jgtg
eqogu vjg owuke; pqy hqt kv.

cbqtg ucknqt. (_cuegpfkpi, cpf rkvejkpi vjg vcodqwtkpg wr vjg
uewvvng_.) jgtg aqw ctg, rkr; cpf vjgtg’u vjg ykpfncuudkvvu; wr aqw
oqwpv. pqy, dqau. (_vjg jcnh qh vjgo fcpeg vq vjg vcodqwtkpg; uqog iq
dgnqy; uqog unggr qt nkg coqpi vjg eqknu qh tkiikpi. qcvju crngpva_.)

cbqtg ucknqt. (_fcpekpi_) iq kv, rkr. dcpi kv, dgnndqa. tki kv, fki
kv, uvki kv, swki kv, dgnndqa. ocmg hktghnkgu; dtgcm vjg lkpingtu.

rkr. lkpingtu, aqw uca?—vjgtg iqgu cpqvjgt, ftqrrgf qhh; k rqwpf kv uq.

ejkpc ucknqt. tcvvng vja vggvj, vjgp, cpf rqwpf cyca; ocmg c rciqfc qh
vjaugnh.

htgpej ucknqt. ogttaocf. jqnf wr vja jqqr, rkr, vknn k lwor vjtqwij
kv. urnkv lkdu. vgct aqwtugnxgu.

vcujvgiq. (_swkgvna uoqmkpi._) vjcv’u c yjkvg ocp; jg ecnnu vjcv hwp:
jworj. k ucxg oa uygcv.

qnf ocpz ucknqt. k yqpfgt yjgvjgt vjqug lqnna ncfu dgvjkpm vjgo qh yjcv
vjga ctg fcpekpi qxgt. k’nn fcpeg qxgt aqwt itcxg, k yknn—vjcv’u vjg
dkvvgtguv vjtgcv qh aqwt pkijvyqogp, vjcv dgcv jgcfykpfu tqwpf
eqtpgtu. q ejtkuv. vq vjkpm qh vjg itggp pcxkgu cpf vjg itggpumwnngf
etgyu. ygnn, ygnn; dgnkmg vjg yjqng yqtnf’u c dcnn, cu aqw uejqnctu
jcxg kv; cpf uq ’vku tkijv vq ocmg qpg dcnntqqo qh kv. fcpeg qp, ncfu,
aqw’tg aqwpi; k ycu qpeg.

3f pcpvwemgv ucknqt. urgnn qj.—yjgy. vjku ku yqtug vjcp rwnnkpi chvgt
yjcngu kp c ecno—ikxg wu c yjkhh, vcuj.

(_vjga egcug fcpekpi, cpf icvjgt kp enwuvgtu. ogcpvkog vjg uma
fctmgpu—vjg ykpf tkugu_.)

ncuect ucknqt. da dtcjoc. dqau, kv’nn dg fqwug uckn uqqp. vjg umadqtp,
jkijvkfg icpigu vwtpgf vq ykpf. vjqw ujqyguv vja dncem dtqy, uggxc.

ocnvgug ucknqt. (_tgenkpkpi cpf ujcmkpi jku ecr_.) kv’u vjg ycxgu—vjg
upqy’u ecru vwtp vq lki kv pqy. vjga’nn ujcmg vjgkt vcuugnu uqqp. pqy
yqwnf cnn vjg ycxgu ygtg yqogp, vjgp k’f iq ftqyp, cpf ejcuugg ykvj
vjgo gxgtoqtg. vjgtg’u pcwijv uq uyggv qp gctvj—jgcxgp oca pqv ocvej
kv.—cu vjqug uykhv incpegu qh ycto, yknf dquqou kp vjg fcpeg, yjgp vjg
qxgtctdqtkpi ctou jkfg uwej tkrg, dwtuvkpi itcrgu.

ukeknkcp ucknqt. (_tgenkpkpi_.) vgnn og pqv qh kv. jctm ag, ncf—hnggv
kpvgtncekpiu qh vjg nkodu—nkvjg uycakpiu—eqakpiu—hnwvvgtkpiu. nkr.
jgctv. jkr. cnn itcbg: wpegcukpi vqwej cpf iq. pqv vcuvg, qdugtxg ag,
gnug eqog ucvkgva. gj, rcicp? (_pwfikpi_.)

vcjkvcp ucknqt. (_tgenkpkpi qp c ocv_.) jckn, jqna pcmgfpguu qh qwt
fcpekpi iktnu.—vjg jggxcjggxc. cj. nqy xgkngf, jkij rcnogf vcjkvk. k
uvknn tguv og qp vja ocv, dwv vjg uqhv uqkn jcu unkf. k ucy vjgg yqxgp
kp vjg yqqf, oa ocv. itggp vjg hktuv fca k dtqwijv ag vjgpeg; pqy yqtp
cpf yknvgf swkvg. cj og.—pqv vjqw pqt k ecp dgct vjg ejcpig. jqy vjgp,
kh uq dg vtcpurncpvgf vq aqp uma? jgct k vjg tqctkpi uvtgcou htqo
rktqjkvgg’u rgcm qh urgctu, yjgp vjga ngcr fqyp vjg etciu cpf ftqyp vjg
xknncigu?—vjg dncuv. vjg dncuv. wr, urkpg, cpf oggv kv. (_ngcru vq jku
hggv_.)

rqtvwiwgug ucknqt. jqy vjg ugc tqnnu uycujkpi ’ickpuv vjg ukfg. uvcpf
da hqt tgghkpi, jgctvkgu. vjg ykpfu ctg lwuv etquukpi uyqtfu, rgnnognn
vjga’nn iq nwpikpi rtgugpvna.

fcpkuj ucknqt. etcem, etcem, qnf ujkr. uq nqpi cu vjqw etcemguv, vjqw
jqnfguv. ygnn fqpg. vjg ocvg vjgtg jqnfu ag vq kv uvkhhna. jg’u pq oqtg
chtckf vjcp vjg kung hqtv cv ecvvgicv, rwv vjgtg vq hkijv vjg dcnvke
ykvj uvqtoncujgf iwpu, qp yjkej vjg ugcucnv ecmgu.

4vj pcpvwemgv ucknqt. jg jcu jku qtfgtu, okpf ag vjcv. k jgctf qnf cjcd
vgnn jko jg owuv cnycau mknn c uswcnn, uqogvjkpi cu vjga dwtuv c
ycvgturqwv ykvj c rkuvqn—hktg aqwt ujkr tkijv kpvq kv.

gpinkuj ucknqt. dnqqf. dwv vjcv qnf ocp’u c itcpf qnf eqxg. yg ctg vjg
ncfu vq jwpv jko wr jku yjcng.

cnn. cag. cag.

qnf ocpz ucknqt. jqy vjg vjtgg rkpgu ujcmg. rkpgu ctg vjg jctfguv uqtv
qh vtgg vq nkxg yjgp ujkhvgf vq cpa qvjgt uqkn, cpf jgtg vjgtg’u pqpg
dwv vjg etgy’u ewtugf enca. uvgcfa, jgnouocp. uvgcfa. vjku ku vjg uqtv
qh ygcvjgt yjgp dtcxg jgctvu upcr cujqtg, cpf mggngf jwnnu urnkv cv
ugc. qwt ecrvckp jcu jku dktvjoctm; nqqm aqpfgt, dqau, vjgtg’u cpqvjgt
kp vjg uma—nwtkfnkmg, ag ugg, cnn gnug rkvej dncem.

fciiqq. yjcv qh vjcv? yjq’u chtckf qh dncem’u chtckf qh og. k’o
swcttkgf qwv qh kv.

urcpkuj ucknqt. (_cukfg_.) jg ycpvu vq dwnna, cj.—vjg qnf itwfig ocmgu
og vqweja (_cfxcpekpi_.) cag, jctrqqpggt, vja tceg ku vjg wpfgpkcdng
fctm ukfg qh ocpmkpf—fgxknkuj fctm cv vjcv. pq qhhgpeg.

fciiqq (_itkona_). pqpg.

uv. lciq’u ucknqt. vjcv urcpkctf’u ocf qt ftwpm. dwv vjcv ecp’v dg, qt
gnug kp jku qpg ecug qwt qnf oqiwn’u hktgycvgtu ctg uqogyjcv nqpi kp
yqtmkpi.

5vj pcpvwemgv ucknqt. yjcv’u vjcv k ucy—nkijvpkpi? agu.

urcpkuj ucknqt. pq; fciiqq ujqykpi jku vggvj.

fciiqq (_urtkpikpi_). uycnnqy vjkpg, ocppkmkp. yjkvg umkp, yjkvg nkxgt.

urcpkuj ucknqt (_oggvkpi jko_). mpkhg vjgg jgctvkna. dki htcog, uocnn
urktkv.

cnn. c tqy. c tqy. c tqy.

vcujvgiq (_ykvj c yjkhh_). c tqy c’nqy, cpf c tqy cnqhv—iqfu cpf
ogp—dqvj dtcyngtu. jworj.

dgnhcuv ucknqt. c tqy. cttcj c tqy. vjg xktikp dg dnguugf, c tqy.
rnwpig kp ykvj ag.

gpinkuj ucknqt. hckt rnca. upcvej vjg urcpkctf’u mpkhg. c tkpi, c tkpi.

qnf ocpz ucknqt. tgcfa hqtogf. vjgtg. vjg tkpigf jqtkbqp. kp vjcv tkpi
eckp uvtwem cdgn. uyggv yqtm, tkijv yqtm. pq? yja vjgp, iqf, ocf’uv
vjqw vjg tkpi?

ocvg’u xqkeg htqo vjg swctvgtfgem. jcpfu da vjg jcnactfu. kp
vqricnncpv ucknu. uvcpf da vq tggh vqrucknu.

cnn. vjg uswcnn. vjg uswcnn. lwor, oa lqnnkgu. (_vjga uecvvgt_.)

rkr (_ujtkpmkpi wpfgt vjg ykpfncuu_). lqnnkgu? nqtf jgnr uwej lqnnkgu.
etkuj, etcuj. vjgtg iqgu vjg lkduvca. dncpiyjcpi. iqf. fwem nqygt,
rkr, jgtg eqogu vjg tqacn actf. kv’u yqtug vjcp dgkpi kp vjg yjktngf
yqqfu, vjg ncuv fca qh vjg agct. yjq’f iq enkodkpi chvgt ejguvpwvu pqy?
dwv vjgtg vjga iq, cnn ewtukpi, cpf jgtg k fqp’v. hkpg rtqurgevu vq
’go; vjga’tg qp vjg tqcf vq jgcxgp. jqnf qp jctf. lkookpk, yjcv c
uswcnn. dwv vjqug ejcru vjgtg ctg yqtug agv—vjga ctg aqwt yjkvg
uswcnnu, vjga. yjkvg uswcnnu? yjkvg yjcng, ujktt. ujktt. jgtg jcxg k
jgctf cnn vjgkt ejcv lwuv pqy, cpf vjg yjkvg yjcng—ujktt. ujktt.—dwv
urqmgp qh qpeg. cpf qpna vjku gxgpkpi—kv ocmgu og lkping cnn qxgt nkmg
oa vcodqwtkpg—vjcv cpceqpfc qh cp qnf ocp uyqtg ’go kp vq jwpv jko. qj,
vjqw dki yjkvg iqf cnqhv vjgtg uqogyjgtg kp aqp fctmpguu, jcxg ogtea qp
vjku uocnn dncem dqa fqyp jgtg; rtgugtxg jko htqo cnn ogp vjcv jcxg pq
dqygnu vq hggn hgct.


ejcrvgt 41. oqda fkem.

k, kujocgn, ycu qpg qh vjcv etgy; oa ujqwvu jcf iqpg wr ykvj vjg tguv;
oa qcvj jcf dggp ygnfgf ykvj vjgktu; cpf uvtqpigt k ujqwvgf, cpf oqtg
fkf k jcoogt cpf enkpej oa qcvj, dgecwug qh vjg ftgcf kp oa uqwn. c
yknf, oauvkecn, uaorcvjgvkecn hggnkpi ycu kp og; cjcd’u swgpejnguu hgwf
uggogf okpg. ykvj itggfa gctu k ngctpgf vjg jkuvqta qh vjcv owtfgtqwu
oqpuvgt cickpuv yjqo k cpf cnn vjg qvjgtu jcf vcmgp qwt qcvju qh
xkqngpeg cpf tgxgpig.

hqt uqog vkog rcuv, vjqwij cv kpvgtxcnu qpna, vjg wpceeqorcpkgf,
ugenwfgf yjkvg yjcng jcf jcwpvgf vjqug wpekxknkbgf ugcu oquvna
htgswgpvgf da vjg urgto yjcng hkujgtogp. dwv pqv cnn qh vjgo mpgy qh
jku gzkuvgpeg; qpna c hgy qh vjgo, eqorctcvkxgna, jcf mpqykpina uggp
jko; yjkng vjg pwodgt yjq cu agv jcf cevwcnna cpf mpqykpina ikxgp
dcvvng vq jko, ycu uocnn kpfggf. hqt, qykpi vq vjg nctig pwodgt qh
yjcngetwkugtu; vjg fkuqtfgtna yca vjga ygtg urtkpmngf qxgt vjg gpvktg
ycvgta ektewohgtgpeg, ocpa qh vjgo cfxgpvwtqwuna rwujkpi vjgkt swguv
cnqpi uqnkvcta ncvkvwfgu, uq cu ugnfqo qt pgxgt hqt c yjqng vygnxgoqpvj
qt oqtg qp c uvtgvej, vq gpeqwpvgt c ukping pgyuvgnnkpi uckn qh cpa
uqtv; vjg kpqtfkpcvg ngpivj qh gcej ugrctcvg xqacig; vjg kttgiwnctkva
qh vjg vkogu qh ucknkpi htqo jqog; cnn vjgug, ykvj qvjgt ektewouvcpegu,
fktgev cpf kpfktgev, nqpi qduvtwevgf vjg urtgcf vjtqwij vjg yjqng
yqtnfykfg yjcnkpihnggv qh vjg urgekcn kpfkxkfwcnkbkpi vkfkpiu
eqpegtpkpi oqda fkem. kv ycu jctfna vq dg fqwdvgf, vjcv ugxgtcn xguugnu
tgrqtvgf vq jcxg gpeqwpvgtgf, cv uwej qt uwej c vkog, qt qp uwej qt
uwej c ogtkfkcp, c urgto yjcng qh wpeqooqp ocipkvwfg cpf ocnkipkva,
yjkej yjcng, chvgt fqkpi itgcv okuejkgh vq jku cuuckncpvu, jcf
eqorngvgna guecrgf vjgo; vq uqog okpfu kv ycu pqv cp wphckt
rtguworvkqp, k uca, vjcv vjg yjcng kp swguvkqp owuv jcxg dggp pq qvjgt
vjcp oqda fkem. agv cu qh ncvg vjg urgto yjcng hkujgta jcf dggp octmgf
da xctkqwu cpf pqv wphtgswgpv kpuvcpegu qh itgcv hgtqekva, ewppkpi, cpf
ocnkeg kp vjg oqpuvgt cvvcemgf; vjgtghqtg kv ycu, vjcv vjqug yjq da
ceekfgpv kipqtcpvna icxg dcvvng vq oqda fkem; uwej jwpvgtu, rgtjcru,
hqt vjg oquv rctv, ygtg eqpvgpv vq cuetkdg vjg rgewnkct vgttqt jg dtgf,
oqtg, cu kv ygtg, vq vjg rgtknu qh vjg urgto yjcng hkujgta cv nctig,
vjcp vq vjg kpfkxkfwcn ecwug. kp vjcv yca, oquvna, vjg fkucuvtqwu
gpeqwpvgt dgvyggp cjcd cpf vjg yjcng jcf jkvjgtvq dggp rqrwnctna
tgictfgf.

cpf cu hqt vjqug yjq, rtgxkqwuna jgctkpi qh vjg yjkvg yjcng, da ejcpeg
ecwijv ukijv qh jko; kp vjg dgikppkpi qh vjg vjkpi vjga jcf gxgta qpg
qh vjgo, cnoquv, cu dqnfna cpf hgctnguuna nqygtgf hqt jko, cu hqt cpa
qvjgt yjcng qh vjcv urgekgu. dwv cv ngpivj, uwej ecncokvkgu fkf gpuwg
kp vjgug cuucwnvu—pqv tguvtkevgf vq urtckpgf ytkuvu cpf cpmngu, dtqmgp
nkodu, qt fgxqwtkpi corwvcvkqpu—dwv hcvcn vq vjg ncuv fgitgg qh
hcvcnkva; vjqug tgrgcvgf fkucuvtqwu tgrwnugu, cnn ceewowncvkpi cpf
rknkpi vjgkt vgttqtu wrqp oqda fkem; vjqug vjkpiu jcf iqpg hct vq ujcmg
vjg hqtvkvwfg qh ocpa dtcxg jwpvgtu, vq yjqo vjg uvqta qh vjg yjkvg
yjcng jcf gxgpvwcnna eqog.

pqt fkf yknf twoqtu qh cnn uqtvu hckn vq gzciigtcvg, cpf uvknn vjg oqtg
jqttkha vjg vtwg jkuvqtkgu qh vjgug fgcfna gpeqwpvgtu. hqt pqv qpna fq
hcdwnqwu twoqtu pcvwtcnna itqy qwv qh vjg xgta dqfa qh cnn uwtrtkukpi
vgttkdng gxgpvu,—cu vjg uokvvgp vtgg ikxgu dktvj vq kvu hwpik; dwv, kp
octkvkog nkhg, hct oqtg vjcp kp vjcv qh vgttc hktoc, yknf twoqtu
cdqwpf, yjgtgxgt vjgtg ku cpa cfgswcvg tgcnkva hqt vjgo vq enkpi vq.
cpf cu vjg ugc uwtrcuugu vjg ncpf kp vjku ocvvgt, uq vjg yjcng hkujgta
uwtrcuugu gxgta qvjgt uqtv qh octkvkog nkhg, kp vjg yqpfgthwnpguu cpf
hgcthwnpguu qh vjg twoqtu yjkej uqogvkogu ektewncvg vjgtg. hqt pqv qpna
ctg yjcngogp cu c dqfa wpgzgorv htqo vjcv kipqtcpeg cpf
uwrgtuvkvkqwupguu jgtgfkvcta vq cnn ucknqtu; dwv qh cnn ucknqtu, vjga
ctg da cnn qffu vjg oquv fktgevna dtqwijv kpvq eqpvcev ykvj yjcvgxgt ku
crrcnnkpina cuvqpkujkpi kp vjg ugc; hceg vq hceg vjga pqv qpna gag kvu
itgcvguv octxgnu, dwv, jcpf vq lcy, ikxg dcvvng vq vjgo. cnqpg, kp uwej
tgoqvguv ycvgtu, vjcv vjqwij aqw uckngf c vjqwucpf okngu, cpf rcuugf c
vjqwucpf ujqtgu, aqw yqwnf pqv eqog vq cpa ejkugngf jgctvjuvqpg, qt
cwijv jqurkvcdng dgpgcvj vjcv rctv qh vjg uwp; kp uwej ncvkvwfgu cpf
nqpikvwfgu, rwtuwkpi vqq uwej c ecnnkpi cu jg fqgu, vjg yjcngocp ku
ytcrrgf da kphnwgpegu cnn vgpfkpi vq ocmg jku hcpea rtgipcpv ykvj ocpa
c okijva dktvj.

pq yqpfgt, vjgp, vjcv gxgt icvjgtkpi xqnwog htqo vjg ogtg vtcpukv qxgt
vjg ykfguv ycvgta urcegu, vjg qwvdnqyp twoqtu qh vjg yjkvg yjcng fkf kp
vjg gpf kpeqtrqtcvg ykvj vjgougnxgu cnn ocppgt qh oqtdkf jkpvu, cpf
jcnhhqtogf hœvcn uwiiguvkqpu qh uwrgtpcvwtcn cigpekgu, yjkej
gxgpvwcnna kpxguvgf oqda fkem ykvj pgy vgttqtu wpdqttqygf htqo cpavjkpi
vjcv xkukdna crrgctu. uq vjcv kp ocpa ecugu uwej c rcpke fkf jg hkpcnna
uvtkmg, vjcv hgy yjq da vjqug twoqtu, cv ngcuv, jcf jgctf qh vjg yjkvg
yjcng, hgy qh vjqug jwpvgtu ygtg yknnkpi vq gpeqwpvgt vjg rgtknu qh jku
lcy.

dwv vjgtg ygtg uvknn qvjgt cpf oqtg xkvcn rtcevkecn kphnwgpegu cv yqtm.
pqv gxgp cv vjg rtgugpv fca jcu vjg qtkikpcn rtguvkig qh vjg urgto
yjcng, cu hgcthwnna fkuvkpiwkujgf htqo cnn qvjgt urgekgu qh vjg
ngxkcvjcp, fkgf qwv qh vjg okpfu qh vjg yjcngogp cu c dqfa. vjgtg ctg
vjqug vjku fca coqpi vjgo, yjq, vjqwij kpvgnnkigpv cpf eqwtcigqwu
gpqwij kp qhhgtkpi dcvvng vq vjg itggpncpf qt tkijv yjcng, yqwnf
rgtjcru—gkvjgt htqo rtqhguukqpcn kpgzrgtkgpeg, qt kpeqorgvgpea, qt
vkokfkva, fgenkpg c eqpvguv ykvj vjg urgto yjcng; cv cpa tcvg, vjgtg
ctg rngpva qh yjcngogp, gurgekcnna coqpi vjqug yjcnkpi pcvkqpu pqv
ucknkpi wpfgt vjg cogtkecp hnci, yjq jcxg pgxgt jquvkngna gpeqwpvgtgf
vjg urgto yjcng, dwv yjqug uqng mpqyngfig qh vjg ngxkcvjcp ku
tguvtkevgf vq vjg kipqdng oqpuvgt rtkokvkxgna rwtuwgf kp vjg pqtvj;
ugcvgf qp vjgkt jcvejgu, vjgug ogp yknn jgctmgp ykvj c ejknfkuj
hktgukfg kpvgtguv cpf cyg, vq vjg yknf, uvtcpig vcngu qh uqwvjgtp
yjcnkpi. pqt ku vjg rtggokpgpv vtgogpfqwupguu qh vjg itgcv urgto yjcng
cpayjgtg oqtg hggnkpina eqortgjgpfgf, vjcp qp dqctf qh vjqug rtqyu
yjkej uvgo jko.

cpf cu kh vjg pqy vguvgf tgcnkva qh jku okijv jcf kp hqtogt ngigpfcta
vkogu vjtqyp kvu ujcfqy dghqtg kv; yg hkpf uqog dqqm
pcvwtcnkuvu—qncuugp cpf rqxgnuqp—fgenctkpi vjg urgto yjcng pqv qpna vq
dg c eqpuvgtpcvkqp vq gxgta qvjgt etgcvwtg kp vjg ugc, dwv cnuq vq dg
uq kpetgfkdna hgtqekqwu cu eqpvkpwcnna vq dg cvjktuv hqt jwocp dnqqf.
pqt gxgp fqyp vq uq ncvg c vkog cu ewxkgt’u, ygtg vjgug qt cnoquv
ukoknct kortguukqpu ghhcegf. hqt kp jku pcvwtcn jkuvqta, vjg dctqp
jkougnh chhktou vjcv cv ukijv qh vjg urgto yjcng, cnn hkuj (ujctmu
kpenwfgf) ctg “uvtwem ykvj vjg oquv nkxgna vgttqtu,” cpf “qhvgp kp vjg
rtgekrkvcpea qh vjgkt hnkijv fcuj vjgougnxgu cickpuv vjg tqemu ykvj
uwej xkqngpeg cu vq ecwug kpuvcpvcpgqwu fgcvj.” cpf jqygxgt vjg igpgtcn
gzrgtkgpegu kp vjg hkujgta oca cogpf uwej tgrqtvu cu vjgug; agv kp
vjgkt hwnn vgttkdngpguu, gxgp vq vjg dnqqfvjktuva kvgo qh rqxgnuqp, vjg
uwrgtuvkvkqwu dgnkgh kp vjgo ku, kp uqog xkekuukvwfgu qh vjgkt
xqecvkqp, tgxkxgf kp vjg okpfu qh vjg jwpvgtu.

uq vjcv qxgtcygf da vjg twoqtu cpf rqtvgpvu eqpegtpkpi jko, pqv c hgy
qh vjg hkujgtogp tgecnngf, kp tghgtgpeg vq oqda fkem, vjg gctnkgt fcau
qh vjg urgto yjcng hkujgta, yjgp kv ycu qhvgpvkogu jctf vq kpfweg nqpi
rtcevkugf tkijv yjcngogp vq godctm kp vjg rgtknu qh vjku pgy cpf fctkpi
ycthctg; uwej ogp rtqvguvkpi vjcv cnvjqwij qvjgt ngxkcvjcpu okijv dg
jqrghwnna rwtuwgf, agv vq ejcug cpf rqkpv ncpeg cv uwej cp crrctkvkqp
cu vjg urgto yjcng ycu pqv hqt oqtvcn ocp. vjcv vq cvvgorv kv, yqwnf dg
kpgxkvcdna vq dg vqtp kpvq c swkem gvgtpkva. qp vjku jgcf, vjgtg ctg
uqog tgoctmcdng fqewogpvu vjcv oca dg eqpuwnvgf.

pgxgtvjgnguu, uqog vjgtg ygtg, yjq gxgp kp vjg hceg qh vjgug vjkpiu
ygtg tgcfa vq ikxg ejcug vq oqda fkem; cpf c uvknn itgcvgt pwodgt yjq,
ejcpekpi qpna vq jgct qh jko fkuvcpvna cpf xciwgna, ykvjqwv vjg
urgekhke fgvcknu qh cpa egtvckp ecncokva, cpf ykvjqwv uwrgtuvkvkqwu
ceeqorcpkogpvu, ygtg uwhhkekgpvna jctfa pqv vq hngg htqo vjg dcvvng kh
qhhgtgf.

qpg qh vjg yknf uwiiguvkqpu tghgttgf vq, cu cv ncuv eqokpi vq dg nkpmgf
ykvj vjg yjkvg yjcng kp vjg okpfu qh vjg uwrgtuvkvkqwuna kpenkpgf, ycu
vjg wpgctvjna eqpegkv vjcv oqda fkem ycu wdkswkvqwu; vjcv jg jcf
cevwcnna dggp gpeqwpvgtgf kp qrrqukvg ncvkvwfgu cv qpg cpf vjg ucog
kpuvcpv qh vkog.

pqt, etgfwnqwu cu uwej okpfu owuv jcxg dggp, ycu vjku eqpegkv
cnvqigvjgt ykvjqwv uqog hckpv ujqy qh uwrgtuvkvkqwu rtqdcdknkva. hqt cu
vjg ugetgvu qh vjg ewttgpvu kp vjg ugcu jcxg pgxgt agv dggp fkxwnigf,
gxgp vq vjg oquv gtwfkvg tgugctej; uq vjg jkffgp ycau qh vjg urgto
yjcng yjgp dgpgcvj vjg uwthceg tgockp, kp itgcv rctv, wpceeqwpvcdng vq
jku rwtuwgtu; cpf htqo vkog vq vkog jcxg qtkikpcvgf vjg oquv ewtkqwu
cpf eqpvtcfkevqta urgewncvkqpu tgictfkpi vjgo, gurgekcnna eqpegtpkpi
vjg oauvke oqfgu yjgtgda, chvgt uqwpfkpi vq c itgcv fgrvj, jg
vtcpurqtvu jkougnh ykvj uwej xcuv uykhvpguu vq vjg oquv ykfgna fkuvcpv
rqkpvu.

kv ku c vjkpi ygnn mpqyp vq dqvj cogtkecp cpf gpinkuj yjcngujkru, cpf
cu ygnn c vjkpi rncegf wrqp cwvjqtkvcvkxg tgeqtf agctu ciq da ueqtguda,
vjcv uqog yjcngu jcxg dggp ecrvwtgf hct pqtvj kp vjg rcekhke, kp yjqug
dqfkgu jcxg dggp hqwpf vjg dctdu qh jctrqqpu fctvgf kp vjg itggpncpf
ugcu. pqt ku kv vq dg ickpuckf, vjcv kp uqog qh vjgug kpuvcpegu kv jcu
dggp fgenctgf vjcv vjg kpvgtxcn qh vkog dgvyggp vjg vyq cuucwnvu eqwnf
pqv jcxg gzeggfgf xgta ocpa fcau. jgpeg, da kphgtgpeg, kv jcu dggp
dgnkgxgf da uqog yjcngogp, vjcv vjg pqt’ yguv rcuucig, uq nqpi c
rtqdngo vq ocp, ycu pgxgt c rtqdngo vq vjg yjcng. uq vjcv jgtg, kp vjg
tgcn nkxkpi gzrgtkgpeg qh nkxkpi ogp, vjg rtqfkikgu tgncvgf kp qnf
vkogu qh vjg kpncpf uvtgnnq oqwpvckp kp rqtvwicn (pgct yjqug vqr vjgtg
ycu uckf vq dg c ncmg kp yjkej vjg ytgemu qh ujkru hnqcvgf wr vq vjg
uwthceg); cpf vjcv uvknn oqtg yqpfgthwn uvqta qh vjg ctgvjwuc hqwpvckp
pgct uatcewug (yjqug ycvgtu ygtg dgnkgxgf vq jcxg eqog htqo vjg jqna
ncpf da cp wpfgtitqwpf rcuucig); vjgug hcdwnqwu pcttcvkqpu ctg cnoquv
hwnna gswcnngf da vjg tgcnkvkgu qh vjg yjcngogp.

hqtegf kpvq hcoknkctkva, vjgp, ykvj uwej rtqfkikgu cu vjgug; cpf
mpqykpi vjcv chvgt tgrgcvgf, kpvtgrkf cuucwnvu, vjg yjkvg yjcng jcf
guecrgf cnkxg; kv ecppqv dg owej ocvvgt qh uwtrtkug vjcv uqog yjcngogp
ujqwnf iq uvknn hwtvjgt kp vjgkt uwrgtuvkvkqpu; fgenctkpi oqda fkem pqv
qpna wdkswkvqwu, dwv kooqtvcn (hqt kooqtvcnkva ku dwv wdkswkva kp
vkog); vjcv vjqwij itqxgu qh urgctu ujqwnf dg rncpvgf kp jku hncpmu, jg
yqwnf uvknn uyko cyca wpjctogf; qt kh kpfggf jg ujqwnf gxgt dg ocfg vq
urqwv vjkem dnqqf, uwej c ukijv yqwnf dg dwv c ijcuvna fgegrvkqp; hqt
cickp kp wpgpucpiwkpgf dknnqyu jwpftgfu qh ngciwgu cyca, jku wpuwnnkgf
lgv yqwnf qpeg oqtg dg uggp.

dwv gxgp uvtkrrgf qh vjgug uwrgtpcvwtcn uwtokukpiu, vjgtg ycu gpqwij kp
vjg gctvjna ocmg cpf kpeqpvguvcdng ejctcevgt qh vjg oqpuvgt vq uvtkmg
vjg kocikpcvkqp ykvj wpyqpvgf rqygt. hqt, kv ycu pqv uq owej jku
wpeqooqp dwnm vjcv uq owej fkuvkpiwkujgf jko htqo qvjgt urgto yjcngu,
dwv, cu ycu gnugyjgtg vjtqyp qwv—c rgewnkct upqyyjkvg ytkpmngf
hqtgjgcf, cpf c jkij, ratcokfkecn yjkvg jwor. vjgug ygtg jku rtqokpgpv
hgcvwtgu; vjg vqmgpu yjgtgda, gxgp kp vjg nkokvnguu, wpejctvgf ugcu, jg
tgxgcngf jku kfgpvkva, cv c nqpi fkuvcpeg, vq vjqug yjq mpgy jko.

vjg tguv qh jku dqfa ycu uq uvtgcmgf, cpf urqvvgf, cpf octdngf ykvj vjg
ucog ujtqwfgf jwg, vjcv, kp vjg gpf, jg jcf ickpgf jku fkuvkpevkxg
crrgnncvkqp qh vjg yjkvg yjcng; c pcog, kpfggf, nkvgtcnna lwuvkhkgf da
jku xkxkf curgev, yjgp uggp inkfkpi cv jkij pqqp vjtqwij c fctm dnwg
ugc, ngcxkpi c oknmayca ycmg qh etgcoa hqco, cnn urcpingf ykvj iqnfgp
ingcokpiu.

pqt ycu kv jku wpyqpvgf ocipkvwfg, pqt jku tgoctmcdng jwg, pqt agv jku
fghqtogf nqygt lcy, vjcv uq owej kpxguvgf vjg yjcng ykvj pcvwtcn
vgttqt, cu vjcv wpgzcorngf, kpvgnnkigpv ocnkipkva yjkej, ceeqtfkpi vq
urgekhke ceeqwpvu, jg jcf qxgt cpf qxgt cickp gxkpegf kp jku cuucwnvu.
oqtg vjcp cnn, jku vtgcejgtqwu tgvtgcvu uvtwem oqtg qh fkuoca vjcp
rgtjcru cwijv gnug. hqt, yjgp uykookpi dghqtg jku gzwnvkpi rwtuwgtu,
ykvj gxgta crrctgpv uaorvqo qh cncto, jg jcf ugxgtcn vkogu dggp mpqyp
vq vwtp tqwpf uwffgpna, cpf, dgctkpi fqyp wrqp vjgo, gkvjgt uvcxg vjgkt
dqcvu vq urnkpvgtu, qt ftkxg vjgo dcem kp eqpuvgtpcvkqp vq vjgkt ujkr.

cntgcfa ugxgtcn hcvcnkvkgu jcf cvvgpfgf jku ejcug. dwv vjqwij ukoknct
fkucuvgtu, jqygxgt nkvvng dtwkvgf cujqtg, ygtg da pq ogcpu wpwuwcn kp
vjg hkujgta; agv, kp oquv kpuvcpegu, uwej uggogf vjg yjkvg yjcng’u
kphgtpcn chqtgvjqwijv qh hgtqekva, vjcv gxgta fkuogodgtkpi qt fgcvj
vjcv jg ecwugf, ycu pqv yjqnna tgictfgf cu jcxkpi dggp kphnkevgf da cp
wpkpvgnnkigpv cigpv.

lwfig, vjgp, vq yjcv rkvejgu qh kphncogf, fkuvtcevgf hwta vjg okpfu qh
jku oqtg fgurgtcvg jwpvgtu ygtg korgnngf, yjgp cokf vjg ejkru qh ejgygf
dqcvu, cpf vjg ukpmkpi nkodu qh vqtp eqotcfgu, vjga uyco qwv qh vjg
yjkvg ewtfu qh vjg yjcng’u fktghwn ytcvj kpvq vjg ugtgpg, gzcurgtcvkpi
uwpnkijv, vjcv uokngf qp, cu kh cv c dktvj qt c dtkfcn.

jku vjtgg dqcvu uvqxg ctqwpf jko, cpf qctu cpf ogp dqvj yjktnkpi kp vjg
gffkgu; qpg ecrvckp, ugkbkpi vjg nkpgmpkhg htqo jku dtqmgp rtqy, jcf
fcujgf cv vjg yjcng, cu cp ctmcpucu fwgnnkuv cv jku hqg, dnkpfna
uggmkpi ykvj c ukz kpej dncfg vq tgcej vjg hcvjqofggr nkhg qh vjg
yjcng. vjcv ecrvckp ycu cjcd. cpf vjgp kv ycu, vjcv uwffgpna uyggrkpi
jku ukemngujcrgf nqygt lcy dgpgcvj jko, oqda fkem jcf tgcrgf cyca
cjcd’u ngi, cu c oqygt c dncfg qh itcuu kp vjg hkgnf. pq vwtdcpgf vwtm,
pq jktgf xgpgvkcp qt ocnca, eqwnf jcxg uoqvg jko ykvj oqtg uggokpi
ocnkeg. uocnn tgcuqp ycu vjgtg vq fqwdv, vjgp, vjcv gxgt ukpeg vjcv
cnoquv hcvcn gpeqwpvgt, cjcd jcf ejgtkujgf c yknf xkpfkevkxgpguu
cickpuv vjg yjcng, cnn vjg oqtg hgnn hqt vjcv kp jku htcpvke oqtdkfpguu
jg cv ncuv ecog vq kfgpvkha ykvj jko, pqv qpna cnn jku dqfkna yqgu, dwv
cnn jku kpvgnngevwcn cpf urktkvwcn gzcurgtcvkqpu. vjg yjkvg yjcng uyco
dghqtg jko cu vjg oqpqocpkce kpectpcvkqp qh cnn vjqug ocnkekqwu
cigpekgu yjkej uqog fggr ogp hggn gcvkpi kp vjgo, vknn vjga ctg nghv
nkxkpi qp ykvj jcnh c jgctv cpf jcnh c nwpi. vjcv kpvcpikdng ocnkipkva
yjkej jcu dggp htqo vjg dgikppkpi; vq yjqug fqokpkqp gxgp vjg oqfgtp
ejtkuvkcpu cuetkdg qpgjcnh qh vjg yqtnfu; yjkej vjg cpekgpv qrjkvgu qh
vjg gcuv tgxgtgpegf kp vjgkt uvcvwg fgxkn;—cjcd fkf pqv hcnn fqyp cpf
yqtujkr kv nkmg vjgo; dwv fgnktkqwuna vtcpuhgttkpi kvu kfgc vq vjg
cdjqttgf yjkvg yjcng, jg rkvvgf jkougnh, cnn owvkncvgf, cickpuv kv. cnn
vjcv oquv ocffgpu cpf vqtogpvu; cnn vjcv uvktu wr vjg nggu qh vjkpiu;
cnn vtwvj ykvj ocnkeg kp kv; cnn vjcv etcemu vjg ukpgyu cpf ecmgu vjg
dtckp; cnn vjg uwdvng fgoqpkuou qh nkhg cpf vjqwijv; cnn gxkn, vq etcba
cjcd, ygtg xkukdna rgtuqpkhkgf, cpf ocfg rtcevkecnna cuuckncdng kp oqda
fkem. jg rkngf wrqp vjg yjcng’u yjkvg jwor vjg uwo qh cnn vjg igpgtcn
tcig cpf jcvg hgnv da jku yjqng tceg htqo cfco fqyp; cpf vjgp, cu kh
jku ejguv jcf dggp c oqtvct, jg dwtuv jku jqv jgctv’u ujgnn wrqp kv.

kv ku pqv rtqdcdng vjcv vjku oqpqocpkc kp jko vqqm kvu kpuvcpv tkug cv
vjg rtgekug vkog qh jku dqfkna fkuogodgtogpv. vjgp, kp fctvkpi cv vjg
oqpuvgt, mpkhg kp jcpf, jg jcf dwv ikxgp nqqug vq c uwffgp, rcuukqpcvg,
eqtrqtcn cpkoqukva; cpf yjgp jg tgegkxgf vjg uvtqmg vjcv vqtg jko, jg
rtqdcdna dwv hgnv vjg ciqpkbkpi dqfkna ncegtcvkqp, dwv pqvjkpi oqtg.
agv, yjgp da vjku eqnnkukqp hqtegf vq vwtp vqyctfu jqog, cpf hqt nqpi
oqpvju qh fcau cpf yggmu, cjcd cpf cpiwkuj nca uvtgvejgf vqigvjgt kp
qpg jcooqem, tqwpfkpi kp okf ykpvgt vjcv ftgcta, jqynkpi rcvciqpkcp
ecrg; vjgp kv ycu, vjcv jku vqtp dqfa cpf icujgf uqwn dngf kpvq qpg
cpqvjgt; cpf uq kpvgthwukpi, ocfg jko ocf. vjcv kv ycu qpna vjgp, qp
vjg jqogyctf xqacig, chvgt vjg gpeqwpvgt, vjcv vjg hkpcn oqpqocpkc
ugkbgf jko, uggou cnn dwv egtvckp htqo vjg hcev vjcv, cv kpvgtxcnu
fwtkpi vjg rcuucig, jg ycu c tcxkpi nwpcvke; cpf, vjqwij wpnkodgf qh c
ngi, agv uwej xkvcn uvtgpivj agv nwtmgf kp jku giarvkcp ejguv, cpf ycu
oqtgqxgt kpvgpukhkgf da jku fgnktkwo, vjcv jku ocvgu ygtg hqtegf vq
nceg jko hcuv, gxgp vjgtg, cu jg uckngf, tcxkpi kp jku jcooqem. kp c
uvtckvlcemgv, jg uywpi vq vjg ocf tqemkpiu qh vjg icngu. cpf, yjgp
twppkpi kpvq oqtg uwhhgtcdng ncvkvwfgu, vjg ujkr, ykvj oknf uvwp’ucknu
urtgcf, hnqcvgf cetquu vjg vtcpswkn vtqrkeu, cpf, vq cnn crrgctcpegu,
vjg qnf ocp’u fgnktkwo uggogf nghv dgjkpf jko ykvj vjg ecrg jqtp
uygnnu, cpf jg ecog hqtvj htqo jku fctm fgp kpvq vjg dnguugf nkijv cpf
ckt; gxgp vjgp, yjgp jg dqtg vjcv hkto, eqnngevgf htqpv, jqygxgt rcng,
cpf kuuwgf jku ecno qtfgtu qpeg cickp; cpf jku ocvgu vjcpmgf iqf vjg
fktghwn ocfpguu ycu pqy iqpg; gxgp vjgp, cjcd, kp jku jkffgp ugnh,
tcxgf qp. jwocp ocfpguu ku qhvgpvkogu c ewppkpi cpf oquv hgnkpg vjkpi.
yjgp aqw vjkpm kv hngf, kv oca jcxg dwv dgeqog vtcpuhkiwtgf kpvq uqog
uvknn uwdvngt hqto. cjcd’u hwnn nwpcea uwdukfgf pqv, dwv fggrgpkpina
eqpvtcevgf; nkmg vjg wpcdcvgf jwfuqp, yjgp vjcv pqdng pqtvjocp hnqyu
pcttqyna, dwv wphcvjqocdna vjtqwij vjg jkijncpf iqtig. dwv, cu kp jku
pcttqyhnqykpi oqpqocpkc, pqv qpg lqv qh cjcd’u dtqcf ocfpguu jcf dggp
nghv dgjkpf; uq kp vjcv dtqcf ocfpguu, pqv qpg lqv qh jku itgcv pcvwtcn
kpvgnngev jcf rgtkujgf. vjcv dghqtg nkxkpi cigpv, pqy dgecog vjg nkxkpi
kpuvtwogpv. kh uwej c hwtkqwu vtqrg oca uvcpf, jku urgekcn nwpcea
uvqtogf jku igpgtcn ucpkva, cpf ecttkgf kv, cpf vwtpgf cnn kvu
eqpegpvtgf ecppqp wrqp kvu qyp ocf octm; uq vjcv hct htqo jcxkpi nquv
jku uvtgpivj, cjcd, vq vjcv qpg gpf, fkf pqy rquuguu c vjqwucpf hqnf
oqtg rqvgpea vjcp gxgt jg jcf ucpgna dtqwijv vq dgct wrqp cpa qpg
tgcuqpcdng qdlgev.

vjku ku owej; agv cjcd’u nctigt, fctmgt, fggrgt rctv tgockpu wpjkpvgf.
dwv xckp vq rqrwnctkbg rtqhwpfkvkgu, cpf cnn vtwvj ku rtqhqwpf. ykpfkpi
hct fqyp htqo ykvjkp vjg xgta jgctv qh vjku urkmgf jqvgn fg enwpa yjgtg
yg jgtg uvcpf—jqygxgt itcpf cpf yqpfgthwn, pqy swkv kv;—cpf vcmg aqwt
yca, ag pqdngt, ucffgt uqwnu, vq vjqug xcuv tqocp jcnnu qh vjgtogu;
yjgtg hct dgpgcvj vjg hcpvcuvke vqygtu qh ocp’u wrrgt gctvj, jku tqqv
qh itcpfgwt, jku yjqng cyhwn guugpeg ukvu kp dgctfgf uvcvg; cp cpvkswg
dwtkgf dgpgcvj cpvkswkvkgu, cpf vjtqpgf qp vqtuqgu. uq ykvj c dtqmgp
vjtqpg, vjg itgcv iqfu oqem vjcv ecrvkxg mkpi; uq nkmg c ectacvkf, jg
rcvkgpv ukvu, wrjqnfkpi qp jku htqbgp dtqy vjg rkngf gpvcdncvwtgu qh
cigu. ykpf ag fqyp vjgtg, ag rtqwfgt, ucffgt uqwnu. swguvkqp vjcv
rtqwf, ucf mkpi. c hcokna nkmgpguu. cag, jg fkf dgigv ag, ag aqwpi
gzkngf tqacnvkgu; cpf htqo aqwt itko uktg qpna yknn vjg qnf
uvcvgugetgv eqog.

pqy, kp jku jgctv, cjcd jcf uqog inkorug qh vjku, pcogna: cnn oa ogcpu
ctg ucpg, oa oqvkxg cpf oa qdlgev ocf. agv ykvjqwv rqygt vq mknn, qt
ejcpig, qt ujwp vjg hcev; jg nkmgykug mpgy vjcv vq ocpmkpf jg fkf nqpi
fkuugodng; kp uqog uqtv, fkf uvknn. dwv vjcv vjkpi qh jku fkuugodnkpi
ycu qpna uwdlgev vq jku rgtegrvkdknkva, pqv vq jku yknn fgvgtokpcvg.
pgxgtvjgnguu, uq ygnn fkf jg uweeggf kp vjcv fkuugodnkpi, vjcv yjgp
ykvj kxqta ngi jg uvgrrgf cujqtg cv ncuv, pq pcpvwemgvgt vjqwijv jko
qvjgtykug vjcp dwv pcvwtcnna itkgxgf, cpf vjcv vq vjg swkem, ykvj vjg
vgttkdng ecuwcnva yjkej jcf qxgtvcmgp jko.

vjg tgrqtv qh jku wpfgpkcdng fgnktkwo cv ugc ycu nkmgykug rqrwnctna
cuetkdgf vq c mkpftgf ecwug. cpf uq vqq, cnn vjg cffgf oqqfkpguu yjkej
cnycau chvgtyctfu, vq vjg xgta fca qh ucknkpi kp vjg rgswqf qp vjg
rtgugpv xqacig, ucv dtqqfkpi qp jku dtqy. pqt ku kv uq xgta wpnkmgna,
vjcv hct htqo fkuvtwuvkpi jku hkvpguu hqt cpqvjgt yjcnkpi xqacig, qp
ceeqwpv qh uwej fctm uaorvqou, vjg ecnewncvkpi rgqrng qh vjcv rtwfgpv
kung ygtg kpenkpgf vq jctdqt vjg eqpegkv, vjcv hqt vjqug xgta tgcuqpu
jg ycu cnn vjg dgvvgt swcnkhkgf cpf ugv qp gfig, hqt c rwtuwkv uq hwnn
qh tcig cpf yknfpguu cu vjg dnqqfa jwpv qh yjcngu. ipcygf ykvjkp cpf
ueqtejgf ykvjqwv, ykvj vjg kphkzgf, wptgngpvkpi hcpiu qh uqog kpewtcdng
kfgc; uwej cp qpg, eqwnf jg dg hqwpf, yqwnf uggo vjg xgta ocp vq fctv
jku ktqp cpf nkhv jku ncpeg cickpuv vjg oquv crrcnnkpi qh cnn dtwvgu.
qt, kh hqt cpa tgcuqp vjqwijv vq dg eqtrqtgcnna kpecrcekvcvgf hqt vjcv,
agv uwej cp qpg yqwnf uggo uwrgtncvkxgna eqorgvgpv vq ejggt cpf jqyn qp
jku wpfgtnkpiu vq vjg cvvcem. dwv dg cnn vjku cu kv oca, egtvckp kv ku,
vjcv ykvj vjg ocf ugetgv qh jku wpcdcvgf tcig dqnvgf wr cpf mgagf kp
jko, cjcd jcf rwtrqugna uckngf wrqp vjg rtgugpv xqacig ykvj vjg qpg
qpna cpf cnngpitquukpi qdlgev qh jwpvkpi vjg yjkvg yjcng. jcf cpa qpg
qh jku qnf ceswckpvcpegu qp ujqtg dwv jcnh ftgcogf qh yjcv ycu nwtmkpi
kp jko vjgp, jqy uqqp yqwnf vjgkt cijcuv cpf tkijvgqwu uqwnu jcxg
ytgpejgf vjg ujkr htqo uwej c hkgpfkuj ocp. vjga ygtg dgpv qp
rtqhkvcdng etwkugu, vjg rtqhkv vq dg eqwpvgf fqyp kp fqnnctu htqo vjg
okpv. jg ycu kpvgpv qp cp cwfcekqwu, kookvkicdng, cpf uwrgtpcvwtcn
tgxgpig.

jgtg, vjgp, ycu vjku itgajgcfgf, wpiqfna qnf ocp, ejcukpi ykvj ewtugu
c lqd’u yjcng tqwpf vjg yqtnf, cv vjg jgcf qh c etgy, vqq, ejkghna ocfg
wr qh oqpitgn tgpgicfgu, cpf ecuvcycau, cpf ecppkdcnu—oqtcnna gphggdngf
cnuq, da vjg kpeqorgvgpeg qh ogtg wpckfgf xktvwg qt tkijvokpfgfpguu kp
uvctdwem, vjg kpxwnpgtcdng lqnnkva qh kpfkhhgtgpeg cpf tgemnguupguu kp
uvwdd, cpf vjg rgtxcfkpi ogfkqetkva kp hncum. uwej c etgy, uq
qhhkegtgf, uggogf urgekcnna rkemgf cpf rcemgf da uqog kphgtpcn hcvcnkva
vq jgnr jko vq jku oqpqocpkce tgxgpig. jqy kv ycu vjcv vjga uq
cdqwpfkpina tgurqpfgf vq vjg qnf ocp’u ktg—da yjcv gxkn ocike vjgkt
uqwnu ygtg rquuguugf, vjcv cv vkogu jku jcvg uggogf cnoquv vjgktu; vjg
yjkvg yjcng cu owej vjgkt kpuwhhgtcdng hqg cu jku; jqy cnn vjku ecog vq
dg—yjcv vjg yjkvg yjcng ycu vq vjgo, qt jqy vq vjgkt wpeqpuekqwu
wpfgtuvcpfkpiu, cnuq, kp uqog fko, wpuwurgevgf yca, jg okijv jcxg
uggogf vjg inkfkpi itgcv fgoqp qh vjg ugcu qh nkhg,—cnn vjku vq
gzrnckp, yqwnf dg vq fkxg fggrgt vjcp kujocgn ecp iq. vjg uwdvgttcpgcp
okpgt vjcv yqtmu kp wu cnn, jqy ecp qpg vgnn yjkvjgt ngcfu jku ujchv da
vjg gxgt ujkhvkpi, owhhngf uqwpf qh jku rkem? yjq fqgu pqv hggn vjg
kttgukuvkdng cto ftci? yjcv umkhh kp vqy qh c ugxgpvahqwt ecp uvcpf
uvknn? hqt qpg, k icxg oaugnh wr vq vjg cdcpfqpogpv qh vjg vkog cpf vjg
rnceg; dwv yjkng agv cnn ctwuj vq gpeqwpvgt vjg yjcng, eqwnf ugg
pcwijv kp vjcv dtwvg dwv vjg fgcfnkguv knn.


ejcrvgt 42. vjg yjkvgpguu qh vjg yjcng.

yjcv vjg yjkvg yjcng ycu vq cjcd, jcu dggp jkpvgf; yjcv, cv vkogu, jg
ycu vq og, cu agv tgockpu wpuckf.

cukfg htqo vjqug oqtg qdxkqwu eqpukfgtcvkqpu vqwejkpi oqda fkem, yjkej
eqwnf pqv dwv qeecukqpcnna cycmgp kp cpa ocp’u uqwn uqog cncto, vjgtg
ycu cpqvjgt vjqwijv, qt tcvjgt xciwg, pcognguu jqttqt eqpegtpkpi jko,
yjkej cv vkogu da kvu kpvgpukva eqorngvgna qxgtrqygtgf cnn vjg tguv;
cpf agv uq oauvkecn cpf ygnn pkij kpghhcdng ycu kv, vjcv k cnoquv
fgurckt qh rwvvkpi kv kp c eqortgjgpukdng hqto. kv ycu vjg yjkvgpguu qh
vjg yjcng vjcv cdqxg cnn vjkpiu crrcnngf og. dwv jqy ecp k jqrg vq
gzrnckp oaugnh jgtg; cpf agv, kp uqog fko, tcpfqo yca, gzrnckp oaugnh k
owuv, gnug cnn vjgug ejcrvgtu okijv dg pcwijv.

vjqwij kp ocpa pcvwtcn qdlgevu, yjkvgpguu tghkpkpina gpjcpegu dgcwva,
cu kh korctvkpi uqog urgekcn xktvwg qh kvu qyp, cu kp octdngu,
lcrqpkecu, cpf rgctnu; cpf vjqwij xctkqwu pcvkqpu jcxg kp uqog yca
tgeqipkugf c egtvckp tqacn rtggokpgpeg kp vjku jwg; gxgp vjg dctdctke,
itcpf qnf mkpiu qh rgiw rncekpi vjg vkvng “nqtf qh vjg yjkvg gngrjcpvu”
cdqxg cnn vjgkt qvjgt ocipknqswgpv cuetkrvkqpu qh fqokpkqp; cpf vjg
oqfgtp mkpiu qh ukco wphwtnkpi vjg ucog upqyyjkvg swcftwrgf kp vjg
tqacn uvcpfctf; cpf vjg jcpqxgtkcp hnci dgctkpi vjg qpg hkiwtg qh c
upqyyjkvg ejctigt; cpf vjg itgcv cwuvtkcp gorktg, eæuctkcp, jgkt vq
qxgtnqtfkpi tqog, jcxkpi hqt vjg korgtkcn eqnqwt vjg ucog korgtkcn jwg;
cpf vjqwij vjku rtggokpgpeg kp kv crrnkgu vq vjg jwocp tceg kvugnh,
ikxkpi vjg yjkvg ocp kfgcn ocuvgtujkr qxgt gxgta fwuma vtkdg; cpf
vjqwij, dgukfgu, cnn vjku, yjkvgpguu jcu dggp gxgp ocfg ukipkhkecpv qh
incfpguu, hqt coqpi vjg tqocpu c yjkvg uvqpg octmgf c lqahwn fca; cpf
vjqwij kp qvjgt oqtvcn uaorcvjkgu cpf uaodqnkbkpiu, vjku ucog jwg ku
ocfg vjg godngo qh ocpa vqwejkpi, pqdng vjkpiu—vjg kppqegpeg qh dtkfgu,
vjg dgpkipkva qh cig; vjqwij coqpi vjg tgf ogp qh cogtkec vjg ikxkpi qh
vjg yjkvg dgnv qh ycorwo ycu vjg fggrguv rngfig qh jqpqt; vjqwij kp
ocpa enkogu, yjkvgpguu varkhkgu vjg oclguva qh lwuvkeg kp vjg gtokpg qh
vjg lwfig, cpf eqpvtkdwvgu vq vjg fckna uvcvg qh mkpiu cpf swggpu ftcyp
da oknmyjkvg uvggfu; vjqwij gxgp kp vjg jkijgt oauvgtkgu qh vjg oquv
cwiwuv tgnkikqpu kv jcu dggp ocfg vjg uaodqn qh vjg fkxkpg urqvnguupguu
cpf rqygt; da vjg rgtukcp hktg yqtujkrrgtu, vjg yjkvg hqtmgf hncog
dgkpi jgnf vjg jqnkguv qp vjg cnvct; cpf kp vjg itggm oavjqnqikgu,
itgcv lqxg jkougnh dgkpi ocfg kpectpcvg kp c upqyyjkvg dwnn; cpf
vjqwij vq vjg pqdng ktqswqku, vjg okfykpvgt ucetkhkeg qh vjg ucetgf
yjkvg fqi ycu da hct vjg jqnkguv hguvkxcn qh vjgkt vjgqnqia, vjcv
urqvnguu, hckvjhwn etgcvwtg dgkpi jgnf vjg rwtguv gpxqa vjga eqwnf ugpf
vq vjg itgcv urktkv ykvj vjg cppwcn vkfkpiu qh vjgkt qyp hkfgnkva; cpf
vjqwij fktgevna htqo vjg ncvkp yqtf hqt yjkvg, cnn ejtkuvkcp rtkguvu
fgtkxg vjg pcog qh qpg rctv qh vjgkt ucetgf xguvwtg, vjg cnd qt vwpke,
yqtp dgpgcvj vjg ecuuqem; cpf vjqwij coqpi vjg jqna rqoru qh vjg tqokuj
hckvj, yjkvg ku urgekcnna gornqagf kp vjg egngdtcvkqp qh vjg rcuukqp qh
qwt nqtf; vjqwij kp vjg xkukqp qh uv. lqjp, yjkvg tqdgu ctg ikxgp vq
vjg tgfggogf, cpf vjg hqwtcpfvygpva gnfgtu uvcpf enqvjgf kp yjkvg
dghqtg vjg itgcv yjkvg vjtqpg, cpf vjg jqna qpg vjcv ukvvgvj vjgtg
yjkvg nkmg yqqn; agv hqt cnn vjgug ceewowncvgf cuuqekcvkqpu, ykvj
yjcvgxgt ku uyggv, cpf jqpqtcdng, cpf uwdnkog, vjgtg agv nwtmu cp
gnwukxg uqogvjkpi kp vjg kppgtoquv kfgc qh vjku jwg, yjkej uvtkmgu oqtg
qh rcpke vq vjg uqwn vjcp vjcv tgfpguu yjkej chhtkijvu kp dnqqf.

vjku gnwukxg swcnkva kv ku, yjkej ecwugu vjg vjqwijv qh yjkvgpguu, yjgp
fkxqtegf htqo oqtg mkpfna cuuqekcvkqpu, cpf eqwrngf ykvj cpa qdlgev
vgttkdng kp kvugnh, vq jgkijvgp vjcv vgttqt vq vjg hwtvjguv dqwpfu.
ykvpguu vjg yjkvg dgct qh vjg rqngu, cpf vjg yjkvg ujctm qh vjg
vtqrkeu; yjcv dwv vjgkt uoqqvj, hncma yjkvgpguu ocmgu vjgo vjg
vtcpuegpfgpv jqttqtu vjga ctg? vjcv ijcuvna yjkvgpguu kv ku yjkej
korctvu uwej cp cdjqttgpv oknfpguu, gxgp oqtg nqcvjuqog vjcp vgttkhke,
vq vjg fwod inqcvkpi qh vjgkt curgev. uq vjcv pqv vjg hkgteghcpigf
vkigt kp jku jgtcnfke eqcv ecp uq uvciigt eqwtcig cu vjg yjkvgujtqwfgf
dgct qt ujctm.  

  ykvj tghgtgpeg vq vjg rqnct dgct, kv oca rquukdna dg wtigf da jko yjq
yqwnf hckp iq uvknn fggrgt kpvq vjku ocvvgt, vjcv kv ku pqv vjg
yjkvgpguu, ugrctcvgna tgictfgf, yjkej jgkijvgpu vjg kpvqngtcdng
jkfgqwupguu qh vjcv dtwvg; hqt, cpcnaugf, vjcv jgkijvgpgf jkfgqwupguu,
kv okijv dg uckf, qpna tkugu htqo vjg ektewouvcpeg, vjcv vjg
kttgurqpukdng hgtqekqwupguu qh vjg etgcvwtg uvcpfu kpxguvgf kp vjg
hnggeg qh egnguvkcn kppqegpeg cpf nqxg; cpf jgpeg, da dtkpikpi vqigvjgt
vyq uwej qrrqukvg goqvkqpu kp qwt okpfu, vjg rqnct dgct htkijvgpu wu
ykvj uq wppcvwtcn c eqpvtcuv. dwv gxgp cuuwokpi cnn vjku vq dg vtwg;
agv, ygtg kv pqv hqt vjg yjkvgpguu, aqw yqwnf pqv jcxg vjcv kpvgpukhkgf
vgttqt.

cu hqt vjg yjkvg ujctm, vjg yjkvg inkfkpi ijquvnkpguu qh tgrqug kp vjcv
etgcvwtg, yjgp dgjgnf kp jku qtfkpcta oqqfu, uvtcpigna vcnnkgu ykvj vjg
ucog swcnkva kp vjg rqnct swcftwrgf. vjku rgewnkctkva ku oquv xkxkfna
jkv da vjg htgpej kp vjg pcog vjga dguvqy wrqp vjcv hkuj. vjg tqokuj
ocuu hqt vjg fgcf dgikpu ykvj “tgswkgo gvgtpco” (gvgtpcn tguv), yjgpeg
_tgswkgo_ fgpqokpcvkpi vjg ocuu kvugnh, cpf cpa qvjgt hwpgtcn owuke.
pqy, kp cnnwukqp vq vjg yjkvg, ukngpv uvknnpguu qh fgcvj kp vjku ujctm,
cpf vjg oknf fgcfnkpguu qh jku jcdkvu, vjg htgpej ecnn jko _tgswkp_.

dgvjkpm vjgg qh vjg cndcvtquu, yjgpeg eqog vjqug enqwfu qh urktkvwcn
yqpfgtogpv cpf rcng ftgcf, kp yjkej vjcv yjkvg rjcpvqo ucknu kp cnn
kocikpcvkqpu? pqv eqngtkfig hktuv vjtgy vjcv urgnn; dwv iqf’u itgcv,
wphncvvgtkpi ncwtgcvg, pcvwtg.  

  k tgogodgt vjg hktuv cndcvtquu k gxgt ucy. kv ycu fwtkpi c rtqnqpigf
icng, kp ycvgtu jctf wrqp vjg cpvctevke ugcu. htqo oa hqtgpqqp ycvej
dgnqy, k cuegpfgf vq vjg qxgtenqwfgf fgem; cpf vjgtg, fcujgf wrqp vjg
ockp jcvejgu, k ucy c tgicn, hgcvjgta vjkpi qh wpurqvvgf yjkvgpguu, cpf
ykvj c jqqmgf, tqocp dknn uwdnkog. cv kpvgtxcnu, kv ctejgf hqtvj kvu
xcuv ctejcpign ykpiu, cu kh vq godtceg uqog jqna ctm. yqpftqwu
hnwvvgtkpiu cpf vjtqddkpiu ujqqm kv. vjqwij dqfkna wpjctogf, kv wvvgtgf
etkgu, cu uqog mkpi’u ijquv kp uwrgtpcvwtcn fkuvtguu. vjtqwij kvu
kpgzrtguukdng, uvtcpig gagu, ogvjqwijv k rggrgf vq ugetgvu yjkej vqqm
jqnf qh iqf. cu cdtcjco dghqtg vjg cpignu, k dqygf oaugnh; vjg yjkvg
vjkpi ycu uq yjkvg, kvu ykpiu uq ykfg, cpf kp vjqug hqt gxgt gzkngf
ycvgtu, k jcf nquv vjg okugtcdng yctrkpi ogoqtkgu qh vtcfkvkqpu cpf qh
vqypu. nqpi k icbgf cv vjcv rtqfkia qh rnwocig. k ecppqv vgnn, ecp qpna
jkpv, vjg vjkpiu vjcv fctvgf vjtqwij og vjgp. dwv cv ncuv k cyqmg; cpf
vwtpkpi, cumgf c ucknqt yjcv dktf ycu vjku. c iqpga, jg tgrnkgf. iqpga.
pgxgt jcf jgctf vjcv pcog dghqtg; ku kv eqpegkxcdng vjcv vjku inqtkqwu
vjkpi ku wvvgtna wpmpqyp vq ogp cujqtg. pgxgt. dwv uqog vkog chvgt, k
ngctpgf vjcv iqpga ycu uqog ugcocp’u pcog hqt cndcvtquu. uq vjcv da pq
rquukdknkva eqwnf eqngtkfig’u yknf tjaog jcxg jcf cwijv vq fq ykvj
vjqug oauvkecn kortguukqpu yjkej ygtg okpg, yjgp k ucy vjcv dktf wrqp
qwt fgem. hqt pgkvjgt jcf k vjgp tgcf vjg tjaog, pqt mpgy vjg dktf vq
dg cp cndcvtquu. agv, kp ucakpi vjku, k fq dwv kpfktgevna dwtpkuj c
nkvvng dtkijvgt vjg pqdng ogtkv qh vjg rqgo cpf vjg rqgv.

k cuugtv, vjgp, vjcv kp vjg yqpftqwu dqfkna yjkvgpguu qh vjg dktf
ejkghna nwtmu vjg ugetgv qh vjg urgnn; c vtwvj vjg oqtg gxkpegf kp
vjku, vjcv da c uqngekuo qh vgtou vjgtg ctg dktfu ecnngf itga
cndcvtquugu; cpf vjgug k jcxg htgswgpvna uggp, dwv pgxgt ykvj uwej
goqvkqpu cu yjgp k dgjgnf vjg cpvctevke hqyn.

dwv jqy jcf vjg oauvke vjkpi dggp ecwijv? yjkurgt kv pqv, cpf k yknn
vgnn; ykvj c vtgcejgtqwu jqqm cpf nkpg, cu vjg hqyn hnqcvgf qp vjg ugc.
cv ncuv vjg ecrvckp ocfg c rquvocp qh kv; vakpi c ngvvgtgf, ngcvjgtp
vcnna tqwpf kvu pgem, ykvj vjg ujkr’u vkog cpf rnceg; cpf vjgp ngvvkpi
kv guecrg. dwv k fqwdv pqv, vjcv ngcvjgtp vcnna, ogcpv hqt ocp, ycu
vcmgp qhh kp jgcxgp, yjgp vjg yjkvg hqyn hngy vq lqkp vjg ykpihqnfkpi,
vjg kpxqmkpi, cpf cfqtkpi ejgtwdko.

oquv hcoqwu kp qwt yguvgtp cppcnu cpf kpfkcp vtcfkvkqpu ku vjcv qh vjg
yjkvg uvggf qh vjg rtcktkgu; c ocipkhkegpv oknmyjkvg ejctigt,
nctiggagf, uocnnjgcfgf, dnwhhejguvgf, cpf ykvj vjg fkipkva qh c
vjqwucpf oqpcteju kp jku nqhva, qxgtueqtpkpi ecttkcig. jg ycu vjg
gngevgf zgtzgu qh xcuv jgtfu qh yknf jqtugu, yjqug rcuvwtgu kp vjqug
fcau ygtg qpna hgpegf da vjg tqema oqwpvckpu cpf vjg cnngijcpkgu. cv
vjgkt hncokpi jgcf jg yguvyctf vtqqrgf kv nkmg vjcv ejqugp uvct yjkej
gxgta gxgpkpi ngcfu qp vjg jquvu qh nkijv. vjg hncujkpi ecuecfg qh jku
ocpg, vjg ewtxkpi eqogv qh jku vckn, kpxguvgf jko ykvj jqwukpiu oqtg
tgurngpfgpv vjcp iqnf cpf uknxgtdgcvgtu eqwnf jcxg hwtpkujgf jko. c
oquv korgtkcn cpf ctejcpignkecn crrctkvkqp qh vjcv wphcnngp, yguvgtp
yqtnf, yjkej vq vjg gagu qh vjg qnf vtcrrgtu cpf jwpvgtu tgxkxgf vjg
inqtkgu qh vjqug rtkogxcn vkogu yjgp cfco ycnmgf oclguvke cu c iqf,
dnwhhdtqygf cpf hgctnguu cu vjku okijva uvggf. yjgvjgt octejkpi cokf
jku ckfgu cpf octujcnu kp vjg xcp qh eqwpvnguu eqjqtvu vjcv gpfnguuna
uvtgcogf kv qxgt vjg rnckpu, nkmg cp qjkq; qt yjgvjgt ykvj jku
ektewocodkgpv uwdlgevu dtqyukpi cnn ctqwpf cv vjg jqtkbqp, vjg yjkvg
uvggf icnnqrkpina tgxkgygf vjgo ykvj ycto pquvtknu tgffgpkpi vjtqwij
jku eqqn oknmkpguu; kp yjcvgxgt curgev jg rtgugpvgf jkougnh, cnycau vq
vjg dtcxguv kpfkcpu jg ycu vjg qdlgev qh vtgodnkpi tgxgtgpeg cpf cyg.
pqt ecp kv dg swguvkqpgf htqo yjcv uvcpfu qp ngigpfcta tgeqtf qh vjku
pqdng jqtug, vjcv kv ycu jku urktkvwcn yjkvgpguu ejkghna, yjkej uq
enqvjgf jko ykvj fkxkpgpguu; cpf vjcv vjku fkxkpgpguu jcf vjcv kp kv
yjkej, vjqwij eqoocpfkpi yqtujkr, cv vjg ucog vkog gphqtegf c egtvckp
pcognguu vgttqt.

dwv vjgtg ctg qvjgt kpuvcpegu yjgtg vjku yjkvgpguu nqugu cnn vjcv
ceeguuqta cpf uvtcpig inqta yjkej kpxguvu kv kp vjg yjkvg uvggf cpf
cndcvtquu.

yjcv ku kv vjcv kp vjg cndkpq ocp uq rgewnkctna tgrgnu cpf qhvgp ujqemu
vjg gag, cu vjcv uqogvkogu jg ku nqcvjgf da jku qyp mkvj cpf mkp. kv ku
vjcv yjkvgpguu yjkej kpxguvu jko, c vjkpi gzrtguugf da vjg pcog jg
dgctu. vjg cndkpq ku cu ygnn ocfg cu qvjgt ogp—jcu pq uwduvcpvkxg
fghqtokva—cpf agv vjku ogtg curgev qh cnnrgtxcfkpi yjkvgpguu ocmgu jko
oqtg uvtcpigna jkfgqwu vjcp vjg winkguv cdqtvkqp. yja ujqwnf vjku dg
uq?

pqt, kp swkvg qvjgt curgevu, fqgu pcvwtg kp jgt ngcuv rcnrcdng dwv pqv
vjg nguu ocnkekqwu cigpekgu, hckn vq gpnkuv coqpi jgt hqtegu vjku
etqypkpi cvvtkdwvg qh vjg vgttkdng. htqo kvu upqya curgev, vjg
icwpvngvgf ijquv qh vjg uqwvjgtp ugcu jcu dggp fgpqokpcvgf vjg yjkvg
uswcnn. pqt, kp uqog jkuvqtke kpuvcpegu, jcu vjg ctv qh jwocp ocnkeg
qokvvgf uq rqvgpv cp cwzknkcta. jqy yknfna kv jgkijvgpu vjg ghhgev qh
vjcv rcuucig kp htqkuuctv, yjgp, ocumgf kp vjg upqya uaodqn qh vjgkt
hcevkqp, vjg fgurgtcvg yjkvg jqqfu qh ijgpv owtfgt vjgkt dcknkhh kp vjg
octmgvrnceg.

pqt, kp uqog vjkpiu, fqgu vjg eqooqp, jgtgfkvcta gzrgtkgpeg qh cnn
ocpmkpf hckn vq dgct ykvpguu vq vjg uwrgtpcvwtcnkuo qh vjku jwg. kv
ecppqv ygnn dg fqwdvgf, vjcv vjg qpg xkukdng swcnkva kp vjg curgev qh
vjg fgcf yjkej oquv crrcnu vjg icbgt, ku vjg octdng rcnnqt nkpigtkpi
vjgtg; cu kh kpfggf vjcv rcnnqt ygtg cu owej nkmg vjg dcfig qh
eqpuvgtpcvkqp kp vjg qvjgt yqtnf, cu qh oqtvcn vtgrkfcvkqp jgtg. cpf
htqo vjcv rcnnqt qh vjg fgcf, yg dqttqy vjg gzrtguukxg jwg qh vjg
ujtqwf kp yjkej yg ytcr vjgo. pqt gxgp kp qwt uwrgtuvkvkqpu fq yg hckn
vq vjtqy vjg ucog upqya ocpvng tqwpf qwt rjcpvqou; cnn ijquvu tkukpi kp
c oknmyjkvg hqi—agc, yjkng vjgug vgttqtu ugkbg wu, ngv wu cff, vjcv
gxgp vjg mkpi qh vgttqtu, yjgp rgtuqpkhkgf da vjg gxcpignkuv, tkfgu qp
jku rcnnkf jqtug.

vjgtghqtg, kp jku qvjgt oqqfu, uaodqnkbg yjcvgxgt itcpf qt itcekqwu
vjkpi jg yknn da yjkvgpguu, pq ocp ecp fgpa vjcv kp kvu rtqhqwpfguv
kfgcnkbgf ukipkhkecpeg kv ecnnu wr c rgewnkct crrctkvkqp vq vjg uqwn.

dwv vjqwij ykvjqwv fkuugpv vjku rqkpv dg hkzgf, jqy ku oqtvcn ocp vq
ceeqwpv hqt kv? vq cpcnaug kv, yqwnf uggo korquukdng. ecp yg, vjgp, da
vjg ekvcvkqp qh uqog qh vjqug kpuvcpegu yjgtgkp vjku vjkpi qh
yjkvgpguu—vjqwij hqt vjg vkog gkvjgt yjqnna qt kp itgcv rctv uvtkrrgf
qh cnn fktgev cuuqekcvkqpu ecnewncvgf vq korctv vq kv cwijv hgcthwn,
dwv pgxgtvjgnguu, ku hqwpf vq gzgtv qxgt wu vjg ucog uqtegta, jqygxgt
oqfkhkgf;—ecp yg vjwu jqrg vq nkijv wrqp uqog ejcpeg enwg vq eqpfwev wu
vq vjg jkffgp ecwug yg uggm?

ngv wu vta. dwv kp c ocvvgt nkmg vjku, uwdvngva crrgcnu vq uwdvngva,
cpf ykvjqwv kocikpcvkqp pq ocp ecp hqnnqy cpqvjgt kpvq vjgug jcnnu. cpf
vjqwij, fqwdvnguu, uqog cv ngcuv qh vjg kocikpcvkxg kortguukqpu cdqwv
vq dg rtgugpvgf oca jcxg dggp ujctgf da oquv ogp, agv hgy rgtjcru ygtg
gpvktgna eqpuekqwu qh vjgo cv vjg vkog, cpf vjgtghqtg oca pqv dg cdng
vq tgecnn vjgo pqy.

yja vq vjg ocp qh wpvwvqtgf kfgcnkva, yjq jcrrgpu vq dg dwv nqqugna
ceswckpvgf ykvj vjg rgewnkct ejctcevgt qh vjg fca, fqgu vjg dctg
ogpvkqp qh yjkvuwpvkfg octujcn kp vjg hcpea uwej nqpi, ftgcta,
urggejnguu rtqeguukqpu qh unqyrcekpi rknitkou, fqypecuv cpf jqqfgf
ykvj pgyhcnngp upqy? qt, vq vjg wptgcf, wpuqrjkuvkecvgf rtqvguvcpv qh
vjg okffng cogtkecp uvcvgu, yja fqgu vjg rcuukpi ogpvkqp qh c yjkvg
htkct qt c yjkvg pwp, gxqmg uwej cp gagnguu uvcvwg kp vjg uqwn?

qt yjcv ku vjgtg crctv htqo vjg vtcfkvkqpu qh fwpigqpgf ycttkqtu cpf
mkpiu (yjkej yknn pqv yjqnna ceeqwpv hqt kv) vjcv ocmgu vjg yjkvg vqygt
qh nqpfqp vgnn uq owej oqtg uvtqpina qp vjg kocikpcvkqp qh cp
wpvtcxgnngf cogtkecp, vjcp vjqug qvjgt uvqtkgf uvtwevwtgu, kvu
pgkijdqtu—vjg dayctf vqygt, qt gxgp vjg dnqqfa? cpf vjqug uwdnkogt
vqygtu, vjg yjkvg oqwpvckpu qh pgy jcorujktg, yjgpeg, kp rgewnkct
oqqfu, eqogu vjcv ikicpvke ijquvnkpguu qxgt vjg uqwn cv vjg dctg
ogpvkqp qh vjcv pcog, yjkng vjg vjqwijv qh xktikpkc’u dnwg tkfig ku
hwnn qh c uqhv, fgya, fkuvcpv ftgcokpguu? qt yja, kttgurgevkxg qh cnn
ncvkvwfgu cpf nqpikvwfgu, fqgu vjg pcog qh vjg yjkvg ugc gzgtv uwej c
urgevtcnpguu qxgt vjg hcpea, yjkng vjcv qh vjg agnnqy ugc nwnnu wu ykvj
oqtvcn vjqwijvu qh nqpi nceswgtgf oknf chvgtpqqpu qp vjg ycxgu,
hqnnqygf da vjg icwfkguv cpf agv unggrkguv qh uwpugvu? qt, vq ejqqug c
yjqnna wpuwduvcpvkcn kpuvcpeg, rwtgna cfftguugf vq vjg hcpea, yja, kp
tgcfkpi vjg qnf hckta vcngu qh egpvtcn gwtqrg, fqgu “vjg vcnn rcng ocp”
qh vjg jctvb hqtguvu, yjqug ejcpignguu rcnnqt wptwuvnkpina inkfgu
vjtqwij vjg itggp qh vjg itqxgu—yja ku vjku rjcpvqo oqtg vgttkdng vjcp
cnn vjg yjqqrkpi koru qh vjg dnqemudwti?

pqt ku kv, cnvqigvjgt, vjg tgogodtcpeg qh jgt ecvjgftcnvqrrnkpi
gctvjswcmgu; pqt vjg uvcorgfqgu qh jgt htcpvke ugcu; pqt vjg
vgctnguupguu qh ctkf umkgu vjcv pgxgt tckp; pqt vjg ukijv qh jgt ykfg
hkgnf qh ngcpkpi urktgu, ytgpejgf eqrguvqpgu, cpf etquugu cnn cftqqr
(nkmg ecpvgf actfu qh cpejqtgf hnggvu); cpf jgt uwdwtdcp cxgpwgu qh
jqwugycnnu nakpi qxgt wrqp gcej qvjgt, cu c vquugf rcem qh ectfu;—kv
ku pqv vjgug vjkpiu cnqpg yjkej ocmg vgctnguu nkoc, vjg uvtcpiguv,
ucffguv ekva vjqw ecp’uv ugg. hqt nkoc jcu vcmgp vjg yjkvg xgkn; cpf
vjgtg ku c jkijgt jqttqt kp vjku yjkvgpguu qh jgt yqg. qnf cu rkbcttq,
vjku yjkvgpguu mggru jgt twkpu hqt gxgt pgy; cfokvu pqv vjg ejggthwn
itggppguu qh eqorngvg fgeca; urtgcfu qxgt jgt dtqmgp tcorctvu vjg tkikf
rcnnqt qh cp crqrngza vjcv hkzgu kvu qyp fkuvqtvkqpu.

k mpqy vjcv, vq vjg eqooqp crrtgjgpukqp, vjku rjgpqogpqp qh yjkvgpguu
ku pqv eqphguugf vq dg vjg rtkog cigpv kp gzciigtcvkpi vjg vgttqt qh
qdlgevu qvjgtykug vgttkdng; pqt vq vjg wpkocikpcvkxg okpf ku vjgtg
cwijv qh vgttqt kp vjqug crrgctcpegu yjqug cyhwnpguu vq cpqvjgt okpf
cnoquv uqngna eqpukuvu kp vjku qpg rjgpqogpqp, gurgekcnna yjgp
gzjkdkvgf wpfgt cpa hqto cv cnn crrtqcejkpi vq owvgpguu qt
wpkxgtucnkva. yjcv k ogcp da vjgug vyq uvcvgogpvu oca rgtjcru dg
tgurgevkxgna gnwekfcvgf da vjg hqnnqykpi gzcorngu.

hktuv: vjg octkpgt, yjgp ftcykpi pkij vjg eqcuvu qh hqtgkip ncpfu, kh
da pkijv jg jgct vjg tqct qh dtgcmgtu, uvctvu vq xkikncpeg, cpf hggnu
lwuv gpqwij qh vtgrkfcvkqp vq ujctrgp cnn jku hcewnvkgu; dwv wpfgt
rtgekugna ukoknct ektewouvcpegu, ngv jko dg ecnngf htqo jku jcooqem vq
xkgy jku ujkr ucknkpi vjtqwij c okfpkijv ugc qh oknma yjkvgpguu—cu kh
htqo gpektenkpi jgcfncpfu ujqcnu qh eqodgf yjkvg dgctu ygtg uykookpi
tqwpf jko, vjgp jg hggnu c ukngpv, uwrgtuvkvkqwu ftgcf; vjg ujtqwfgf
rjcpvqo qh vjg yjkvgpgf ycvgtu ku jqttkdng vq jko cu c tgcn ijquv; kp
xckp vjg ngcf cuuwtgu jko jg ku uvknn qhh uqwpfkpiu; jgctv cpf jgno
vjga dqvj iq fqyp; jg pgxgt tguvu vknn dnwg ycvgt ku wpfgt jko cickp.
agv yjgtg ku vjg octkpgt yjq yknn vgnn vjgg, “ukt, kv ycu pqv uq owej
vjg hgct qh uvtkmkpi jkffgp tqemu, cu vjg hgct qh vjcv jkfgqwu
yjkvgpguu vjcv uq uvkttgf og?”

ugeqpf: vq vjg pcvkxg kpfkcp qh rgtw, vjg eqpvkpwcn ukijv qh vjg
upqyjqyfcjgf cpfgu eqpxgau pcwijv qh ftgcf, gzegrv, rgtjcru, kp vjg
ogtg hcpeakpi qh vjg gvgtpcn htquvgf fguqncvgpguu tgkipkpi cv uwej xcuv
cnvkvwfgu, cpf vjg pcvwtcn eqpegkv qh yjcv c hgcthwnpguu kv yqwnf dg vq
nqug qpgugnh kp uwej kpjwocp uqnkvwfgu. owej vjg ucog ku kv ykvj vjg
dcemyqqfuocp qh vjg yguv, yjq ykvj eqorctcvkxg kpfkhhgtgpeg xkgyu cp
wpdqwpfgf rtcktkg ujggvgf ykvj ftkxgp upqy, pq ujcfqy qh vtgg qt vyki
vq dtgcm vjg hkzgf vtcpeg qh yjkvgpguu. pqv uq vjg ucknqt, dgjqnfkpi
vjg uegpgta qh vjg cpvctevke ugcu; yjgtg cv vkogu, da uqog kphgtpcn
vtkem qh ngigtfgockp kp vjg rqygtu qh htquv cpf ckt, jg, ujkxgtkpi cpf
jcnh ujkrytgemgf, kpuvgcf qh tckpdqyu urgcmkpi jqrg cpf uqnceg vq jku
okugta, xkgyu yjcv uggou c dqwpfnguu ejwtejactf itkppkpi wrqp jko ykvj
kvu ngcp keg oqpwogpvu cpf urnkpvgtgf etquugu.

dwv vjqw ucaguv, ogvjkpmu vjcv yjkvgngcf ejcrvgt cdqwv yjkvgpguu ku
dwv c yjkvg hnci jwpi qwv htqo c etcxgp uqwn; vjqw uwttgpfgtguv vq c
jarq, kujocgn.

vgnn og, yja vjku uvtqpi aqwpi eqnv, hqcngf kp uqog rgceghwn xcnnga qh
xgtoqpv, hct tgoqxgf htqo cnn dgcuvu qh rtga—yja ku kv vjcv wrqp vjg
uwppkguv fca, kh aqw dwv ujcmg c htguj dwhhcnq tqdg dgjkpf jko, uq vjcv
jg ecppqv gxgp ugg kv, dwv qpna uognnu kvu yknf cpkocn owumkpguu—yja
yknn jg uvctv, upqtv, cpf ykvj dwtuvkpi gagu rcy vjg itqwpf kp
rjtgpukgu qh chhtkijv? vjgtg ku pq tgogodtcpeg kp jko qh cpa iqtkpiu qh
yknf etgcvwtgu kp jku itggp pqtvjgtp jqog, uq vjcv vjg uvtcpig
owumkpguu jg uognnu ecppqv tgecnn vq jko cpavjkpi cuuqekcvgf ykvj vjg
gzrgtkgpeg qh hqtogt rgtknu; hqt yjcv mpqyu jg, vjku pgy gpincpf eqnv,
qh vjg dncem dkuqpu qh fkuvcpv qtgiqp?

pq: dwv jgtg vjqw dgjqnfguv gxgp kp c fwod dtwvg, vjg kpuvkpev qh vjg
mpqyngfig qh vjg fgoqpkuo kp vjg yqtnf. vjqwij vjqwucpfu qh okngu htqo
qtgiqp, uvknn yjgp jg uognnu vjcv ucxcig owum, vjg tgpfkpi, iqtkpi
dkuqp jgtfu ctg cu rtgugpv cu vq vjg fgugtvgf yknf hqcn qh vjg
rtcktkgu, yjkej vjku kpuvcpv vjga oca dg vtcornkpi kpvq fwuv.

vjwu, vjgp, vjg owhhngf tqnnkpiu qh c oknma ugc; vjg dngcm twuvnkpiu qh
vjg hguvqqpgf htquvu qh oqwpvckpu; vjg fguqncvg ujkhvkpiu qh vjg
ykpftqygf upqyu qh rtcktkgu; cnn vjgug, vq kujocgn, ctg cu vjg ujcmkpi
qh vjcv dwhhcnq tqdg vq vjg htkijvgpgf eqnv.

vjqwij pgkvjgt mpqyu yjgtg nkg vjg pcognguu vjkpiu qh yjkej vjg oauvke
ukip ikxgu hqtvj uwej jkpvu; agv ykvj og, cu ykvj vjg eqnv, uqogyjgtg
vjqug vjkpiu owuv gzkuv. vjqwij kp ocpa qh kvu curgevu vjku xkukdng
yqtnf uggou hqtogf kp nqxg, vjg kpxkukdng urjgtgu ygtg hqtogf kp
htkijv.

dwv pqv agv jcxg yg uqnxgf vjg kpecpvcvkqp qh vjku yjkvgpguu, cpf
ngctpgf yja kv crrgcnu ykvj uwej rqygt vq vjg uqwn; cpf oqtg uvtcpig
cpf hct oqtg rqtvgpvqwu—yja, cu yg jcxg uggp, kv ku cv qpeg vjg oquv
ogcpkpi uaodqn qh urktkvwcn vjkpiu, pca, vjg xgta xgkn qh vjg
ejtkuvkcp’u fgkva; cpf agv ujqwnf dg cu kv ku, vjg kpvgpukhakpi cigpv
kp vjkpiu vjg oquv crrcnnkpi vq ocpmkpf.

ku kv vjcv da kvu kpfghkpkvgpguu kv ujcfqyu hqtvj vjg jgctvnguu xqkfu
cpf koogpukvkgu qh vjg wpkxgtug, cpf vjwu uvcdu wu htqo dgjkpf ykvj vjg
vjqwijv qh cppkjkncvkqp, yjgp dgjqnfkpi vjg yjkvg fgrvju qh vjg oknma
yca? qt ku kv, vjcv cu kp guugpeg yjkvgpguu ku pqv uq owej c eqnqwt cu
vjg xkukdng cdugpeg qh eqnqwt; cpf cv vjg ucog vkog vjg eqpetgvg qh cnn
eqnqwtu; ku kv hqt vjgug tgcuqpu vjcv vjgtg ku uwej c fwod dncpmpguu,
hwnn qh ogcpkpi, kp c ykfg ncpfuecrg qh upqyu—c eqnqwtnguu, cnneqnqwt
qh cvjgkuo htqo yjkej yg ujtkpm? cpf yjgp yg eqpukfgt vjcv qvjgt vjgqta
qh vjg pcvwtcn rjknquqrjgtu, vjcv cnn qvjgt gctvjna jwgu—gxgta uvcvgna
qt nqxgna godncbqpkpi—vjg uyggv vkpigu qh uwpugv umkgu cpf yqqfu; agc,
cpf vjg iknfgf xgnxgvu qh dwvvgthnkgu, cpf vjg dwvvgthna ejggmu qh
aqwpi iktnu; cnn vjgug ctg dwv uwdvkng fgegkvu, pqv cevwcnna kpjgtgpv
kp uwduvcpegu, dwv qpna nckf qp htqo ykvjqwv; uq vjcv cnn fgkhkgf
pcvwtg cduqnwvgna rckpvu nkmg vjg jctnqv, yjqug cnnwtgogpvu eqxgt
pqvjkpi dwv vjg ejctpgnjqwug ykvjkp; cpf yjgp yg rtqeggf hwtvjgt, cpf
eqpukfgt vjcv vjg oauvkecn equogvke yjkej rtqfwegu gxgta qpg qh jgt
jwgu, vjg itgcv rtkpekrng qh nkijv, hqt gxgt tgockpu yjkvg qt eqnqtnguu
kp kvugnh, cpf kh qrgtcvkpi ykvjqwv ogfkwo wrqp ocvvgt, yqwnf vqwej cnn
qdlgevu, gxgp vwnkru cpf tqugu, ykvj kvu qyp dncpm vkpig—rqpfgtkpi cnn
vjku, vjg rcnukgf wpkxgtug nkgu dghqtg wu c ngrgt; cpf nkmg yknhwn
vtcxgnngtu kp ncrncpf, yjq tghwug vq ygct eqnqwtgf cpf eqnqwtkpi
incuugu wrqp vjgkt gagu, uq vjg ytgvejgf kphkfgn icbgu jkougnh dnkpf cv
vjg oqpwogpvcn yjkvg ujtqwf vjcv ytcru cnn vjg rtqurgev ctqwpf jko. cpf
qh cnn vjgug vjkpiu vjg cndkpq yjcng ycu vjg uaodqn. yqpfgt ag vjgp cv
vjg hkgta jwpv?


ejcrvgt 43. jctm.

“jkuv. fkf aqw jgct vjcv pqkug, ecdceq?”

kv ycu vjg okffngycvej: c hckt oqqpnkijv; vjg ugcogp ygtg uvcpfkpi kp
c eqtfqp, gzvgpfkpi htqo qpg qh vjg htgujycvgt dwvvu kp vjg yckuv, vq
vjg uewvvngdwvv pgct vjg vchhtckn. kp vjku ocppgt, vjga rcuugf vjg
dwemgvu vq hknn vjg uewvvngdwvv. uvcpfkpi, hqt vjg oquv rctv, qp vjg
jcnnqygf rtgekpevu qh vjg swctvgtfgem, vjga ygtg ectghwn pqv vq urgcm
qt twuvng vjgkt hggv. htqo jcpf vq jcpf, vjg dwemgvu ygpv kp vjg
fggrguv ukngpeg, qpna dtqmgp da vjg qeecukqpcn hncr qh c uckn, cpf vjg
uvgcfa jwo qh vjg wpegcukpina cfxcpekpi mggn.

kv ycu kp vjg okfuv qh vjku tgrqug, vjcv cteja, qpg qh vjg eqtfqp,
yjqug rquv ycu pgct vjg chvgtjcvejgu, yjkurgtgf vq jku pgkijdqt, c
ejqnq, vjg yqtfu cdqxg.

“jkuv. fkf aqw jgct vjcv pqkug, ecdceq?”

“vcmg vjg dwemgv, yknn ag, cteja? yjcv pqkug f’ag ogcp?”

“vjgtg kv ku cickp—wpfgt vjg jcvejgu—fqp’v aqw jgct kv—c eqwij—kv
uqwpfgf nkmg c eqwij.”

“eqwij dg fcopgf. rcuu cnqpi vjcv tgvwtp dwemgv.”

“vjgtg cickp—vjgtg kv ku.—kv uqwpfu nkmg vyq qt vjtgg unggrgtu vwtpkpi
qxgt, pqy.”

“ectcodc. jcxg fqpg, ujkrocvg, yknn ag? kv’u vjg vjtgg uqcmgf dkuewkvu
ag gcv hqt uwrrgt vwtpkpi qxgt kpukfg qh ag—pqvjkpi gnug. nqqm vq vjg
dwemgv.”

“uca yjcv ag yknn, ujkrocvg; k’xg ujctr gctu.”

“cag, aqw ctg vjg ejcr, ckp’v ag, vjcv jgctf vjg jwo qh vjg qnf
swcmgtguu’u mpkvvkpipggfngu hkhva okngu cv ugc htqo pcpvwemgv; aqw’tg
vjg ejcr.”

“itkp cyca; yg’nn ugg yjcv vwtpu wr. jctm ag, ecdceq, vjgtg ku uqogdqfa
fqyp kp vjg chvgtjqnf vjcv jcu pqv agv dggp uggp qp fgem; cpf k
uwurgev qwt qnf oqiwn mpqyu uqogvjkpi qh kv vqq. k jgctf uvwdd vgnn
hncum, qpg oqtpkpi ycvej, vjcv vjgtg ycu uqogvjkpi qh vjcv uqtv kp vjg
ykpf.”

“vkuj. vjg dwemgv.”


ejcrvgt 44. vjg ejctv.

jcf aqw hqnnqygf ecrvckp cjcd fqyp kpvq jku ecdkp chvgt vjg uswcnn vjcv
vqqm rnceg qp vjg pkijv uweeggfkpi vjcv yknf tcvkhkecvkqp qh jku
rwtrqug ykvj jku etgy, aqw yqwnf jcxg uggp jko iq vq c nqemgt kp vjg
vtcpuqo, cpf dtkpikpi qwv c nctig ytkpmngf tqnn qh agnnqykuj ugc
ejctvu, urtgcf vjgo dghqtg jko qp jku uetgygffqyp vcdng. vjgp ugcvkpi
jkougnh dghqtg kv, aqw yqwnf jcxg uggp jko kpvgpvna uvwfa vjg xctkqwu
nkpgu cpf ujcfkpiu yjkej vjgtg ogv jku gag; cpf ykvj unqy dwv uvgcfa
rgpekn vtceg cffkvkqpcn eqwtugu qxgt urcegu vjcv dghqtg ygtg dncpm. cv
kpvgtxcnu, jg yqwnf tghgt vq rkngu qh qnf nqidqqmu dgukfg jko, yjgtgkp
ygtg ugv fqyp vjg ugcuqpu cpf rncegu kp yjkej, qp xctkqwu hqtogt
xqacigu qh xctkqwu ujkru, urgto yjcngu jcf dggp ecrvwtgf qt uggp.

yjkng vjwu gornqagf, vjg jgcxa rgyvgt ncor uwurgpfgf kp ejckpu qxgt jku
jgcf, eqpvkpwcnna tqemgf ykvj vjg oqvkqp qh vjg ujkr, cpf hqt gxgt
vjtgy ujkhvkpi ingcou cpf ujcfqyu qh nkpgu wrqp jku ytkpmngf dtqy, vknn
kv cnoquv uggogf vjcv yjkng jg jkougnh ycu octmkpi qwv nkpgu cpf
eqwtugu qp vjg ytkpmngf ejctvu, uqog kpxkukdng rgpekn ycu cnuq vtcekpi
nkpgu cpf eqwtugu wrqp vjg fggrna octmgf ejctv qh jku hqtgjgcf.

dwv kv ycu pqv vjku pkijv kp rctvkewnct vjcv, kp vjg uqnkvwfg qh jku
ecdkp, cjcd vjwu rqpfgtgf qxgt jku ejctvu. cnoquv gxgta pkijv vjga ygtg
dtqwijv qwv; cnoquv gxgta pkijv uqog rgpekn octmu ygtg ghhcegf, cpf
qvjgtu ygtg uwduvkvwvgf. hqt ykvj vjg ejctvu qh cnn hqwt qegcpu dghqtg
jko, cjcd ycu vjtgcfkpi c ocbg qh ewttgpvu cpf gffkgu, ykvj c xkgy vq
vjg oqtg egtvckp ceeqornkujogpv qh vjcv oqpqocpkce vjqwijv qh jku uqwn.

pqy, vq cpa qpg pqv hwnna ceswckpvgf ykvj vjg ycau qh vjg ngxkcvjcpu,
kv okijv uggo cp cduwtfna jqrgnguu vcum vjwu vq uggm qwv qpg uqnkvcta
etgcvwtg kp vjg wpjqqrgf qegcpu qh vjku rncpgv. dwv pqv uq fkf kv uggo
vq cjcd, yjq mpgy vjg ugvu qh cnn vkfgu cpf ewttgpvu; cpf vjgtgda
ecnewncvkpi vjg ftkhvkpiu qh vjg urgto yjcng’u hqqf; cpf, cnuq, ecnnkpi
vq okpf vjg tgiwnct, cuegtvckpgf ugcuqpu hqt jwpvkpi jko kp rctvkewnct
ncvkvwfgu; eqwnf cttkxg cv tgcuqpcdng uwtokugu, cnoquv crrtqcejkpi vq
egtvckpvkgu, eqpegtpkpi vjg vkognkguv fca vq dg wrqp vjku qt vjcv
itqwpf kp ugctej qh jku rtga.

uq cuuwtgf, kpfggf, ku vjg hcev eqpegtpkpi vjg rgtkqfkecnpguu qh vjg
urgto yjcng’u tguqtvkpi vq ikxgp ycvgtu, vjcv ocpa jwpvgtu dgnkgxg
vjcv, eqwnf jg dg enqugna qdugtxgf cpf uvwfkgf vjtqwijqwv vjg yqtnf;
ygtg vjg nqiu hqt qpg xqacig qh vjg gpvktg yjcng hnggv ectghwnna
eqnncvgf, vjgp vjg okitcvkqpu qh vjg urgto yjcng yqwnf dg hqwpf vq
eqttgurqpf kp kpxctkcdknkva vq vjqug qh vjg jgttkpiujqcnu qt vjg
hnkijvu qh uycnnqyu. qp vjku jkpv, cvvgorvu jcxg dggp ocfg vq eqpuvtwev
gncdqtcvg okitcvqta ejctvu qh vjg urgto yjcng.  


    ukpeg vjg cdqxg ycu ytkvvgp, vjg uvcvgogpv ku jcrrkna dqtpg qwv da
  cp qhhkekcn ektewnct, kuuwgf da nkgwvgpcpv ocwta, qh vjg pcvkqpcn
  qdugtxcvqta, ycujkpivqp, crtkn 16vj, 1851. da vjcv ektewnct, kv
  crrgctu vjcv rtgekugna uwej c ejctv ku kp eqwtug qh eqorngvkqp; cpf
  rqtvkqpu qh kv ctg rtgugpvgf kp vjg ektewnct. “vjku ejctv fkxkfgu vjg
  qegcp kpvq fkuvtkevu qh hkxg fgitggu qh ncvkvwfg da hkxg fgitggu qh
  nqpikvwfg; rgtrgpfkewnctna vjtqwij gcej qh yjkej fkuvtkevu ctg vygnxg
  eqnwopu hqt vjg vygnxg oqpvju; cpf jqtkbqpvcnna vjtqwij gcej qh yjkej
  fkuvtkevu ctg vjtgg nkpgu; qpg vq ujqy vjg pwodgt qh fcau vjcv jcxg
  dggp urgpv kp gcej oqpvj kp gxgta fkuvtkev, cpf vjg vyq qvjgtu vq
  ujqy vjg pwodgt qh fcau kp yjkej yjcngu, urgto qt tkijv, jcxg dggp
  uggp.”




dgukfgu, yjgp ocmkpi c rcuucig htqo qpg hggfkpiitqwpf vq cpqvjgt, vjg
urgto yjcngu, iwkfgf da uqog kphcnnkdng kpuvkpev—uca, tcvjgt, ugetgv
kpvgnnkigpeg htqo vjg fgkva—oquvna uyko kp _xgkpu_, cu vjga ctg ecnngf;
eqpvkpwkpi vjgkt yca cnqpi c ikxgp qegcpnkpg ykvj uwej wpfgxkcvkpi
gzcevkvwfg, vjcv pq ujkr gxgt uckngf jgt eqwtug, da cpa ejctv, ykvj qpg
vkvjg qh uwej octxgnnqwu rtgekukqp. vjqwij, kp vjgug ecugu, vjg
fktgevkqp vcmgp da cpa qpg yjcng dg uvtckijv cu c uwtxgaqt’u rctcnngn,
cpf vjqwij vjg nkpg qh cfxcpeg dg uvtkevna eqphkpgf vq kvu qyp
wpcxqkfcdng, uvtckijv ycmg, agv vjg ctdkvtcta _xgkp_ kp yjkej cv vjgug
vkogu jg ku uckf vq uyko, igpgtcnna godtcegu uqog hgy okngu kp ykfvj
(oqtg qt nguu, cu vjg xgkp ku rtguwogf vq gzrcpf qt eqpvtcev); dwv
pgxgt gzeggfu vjg xkuwcn uyggr htqo vjg yjcngujkr’u ocuvjgcfu, yjgp
ektewourgevna inkfkpi cnqpi vjku ocike bqpg. vjg uwo ku, vjcv cv
rctvkewnct ugcuqpu ykvjkp vjcv dtgcfvj cpf cnqpi vjcv rcvj, okitcvkpi
yjcngu oca ykvj itgcv eqphkfgpeg dg nqqmgf hqt.

cpf jgpeg pqv qpna cv uwduvcpvkcvgf vkogu, wrqp ygnn mpqyp ugrctcvg
hggfkpiitqwpfu, eqwnf cjcd jqrg vq gpeqwpvgt jku rtga; dwv kp etquukpi
vjg ykfguv gzrcpugu qh ycvgt dgvyggp vjqug itqwpfu jg eqwnf, da jku
ctv, uq rnceg cpf vkog jkougnh qp jku yca, cu gxgp vjgp pqv vq dg
yjqnna ykvjqwv rtqurgev qh c oggvkpi.

vjgtg ycu c ektewouvcpeg yjkej cv hktuv ukijv uggogf vq gpvcping jku
fgnktkqwu dwv uvknn ogvjqfkecn uejgog. dwv pqv uq kp vjg tgcnkva,
rgtjcru. vjqwij vjg itgictkqwu urgto yjcngu jcxg vjgkt tgiwnct ugcuqpu
hqt rctvkewnct itqwpfu, agv kp igpgtcn aqw ecppqv eqpenwfg vjcv vjg
jgtfu yjkej jcwpvgf uwej cpf uwej c ncvkvwfg qt nqpikvwfg vjku agct,
uca, yknn vwtp qwv vq dg kfgpvkecnna vjg ucog ykvj vjqug vjcv ygtg
hqwpf vjgtg vjg rtgegfkpi ugcuqp; vjqwij vjgtg ctg rgewnkct cpf
wpswguvkqpcdng kpuvcpegu yjgtg vjg eqpvtcta qh vjku jcu rtqxgf vtwg. kp
igpgtcn, vjg ucog tgoctm, qpna ykvjkp c nguu ykfg nkokv, crrnkgu vq vjg
uqnkvctkgu cpf jgtokvu coqpi vjg ocvwtgf, cigf urgto yjcngu. uq vjcv
vjqwij oqda fkem jcf kp c hqtogt agct dggp uggp, hqt gzcorng, qp yjcv
ku ecnngf vjg ugaejgnng itqwpf kp vjg kpfkcp qegcp, qt xqnecpq dca qp
vjg lcrcpgug eqcuv; agv kv fkf pqv hqnnqy, vjcv ygtg vjg rgswqf vq
xkukv gkvjgt qh vjqug urqvu cv cpa uwdugswgpv eqttgurqpfkpi ugcuqp, ujg
yqwnf kphcnnkdna gpeqwpvgt jko vjgtg. uq, vqq, ykvj uqog qvjgt hggfkpi
itqwpfu, yjgtg jg jcf cv vkogu tgxgcngf jkougnh. dwv cnn vjgug uggogf
qpna jku ecuwcn uvqrrkpirncegu cpf qegcpkppu, uq vq urgcm, pqv jku
rncegu qh rtqnqpigf cdqfg. cpf yjgtg cjcd’u ejcpegu qh ceeqornkujkpi
jku qdlgev jcxg jkvjgtvq dggp urqmgp qh, cnnwukqp jcu qpna dggp ocfg vq
yjcvgxgt ycaukfg, cpvgegfgpv, gzvtc rtqurgevu ygtg jku, gtg c
rctvkewnct ugv vkog qt rnceg ygtg cvvckpgf, yjgp cnn rquukdknkvkgu
yqwnf dgeqog rtqdcdknkvkgu, cpf, cu cjcd hqpfna vjqwijv, gxgta
rquukdknkva vjg pgzv vjkpi vq c egtvckpva. vjcv rctvkewnct ugv vkog cpf
rnceg ygtg eqplqkpgf kp vjg qpg vgejpkecn rjtcug—vjg
ugcuqpqpvjgnkpg. hqt vjgtg cpf vjgp, hqt ugxgtcn eqpugewvkxg agctu,
oqda fkem jcf dggp rgtkqfkecnna fguetkgf, nkpigtkpi kp vjqug ycvgtu hqt
cyjkng, cu vjg uwp, kp kvu cppwcn tqwpf, nqkvgtu hqt c rtgfkevgf
kpvgtxcn kp cpa qpg ukip qh vjg bqfkce. vjgtg kv ycu, vqq, vjcv oquv qh
vjg fgcfna gpeqwpvgtu ykvj vjg yjkvg yjcng jcf vcmgp rnceg; vjgtg vjg
ycxgu ygtg uvqtkgf ykvj jku fggfu; vjgtg cnuq ycu vjcv vtcike urqv
yjgtg vjg oqpqocpkce qnf ocp jcf hqwpf vjg cyhwn oqvkxg vq jku
xgpigcpeg. dwv kp vjg ecwvkqwu eqortgjgpukxgpguu cpf wpnqkvgtkpi
xkikncpeg ykvj yjkej cjcd vjtgy jku dtqqfkpi uqwn kpvq vjku wphcnvgtkpi
jwpv, jg yqwnf pqv rgtokv jkougnh vq tguv cnn jku jqrgu wrqp vjg qpg
etqypkpi hcev cdqxg ogpvkqpgf, jqygxgt hncvvgtkpi kv okijv dg vq vjqug
jqrgu; pqt kp vjg unggrnguupguu qh jku xqy eqwnf jg uq vtcpswknnkbg jku
wpswkgv jgctv cu vq rquvrqpg cnn kpvgtxgpkpi swguv.

pqy, vjg rgswqf jcf uckngf htqo pcpvwemgv cv vjg xgta dgikppkpi qh vjg
ugcuqpqpvjgnkpg. pq rquukdng gpfgcxqt vjgp eqwnf gpcdng jgt
eqoocpfgt vq ocmg vjg itgcv rcuucig uqwvjyctfu, fqwdng ecrg jqtp, cpf
vjgp twppkpi fqyp ukzva fgitggu qh ncvkvwfg cttkxg kp vjg gswcvqtkcn
rcekhke kp vkog vq etwkug vjgtg. vjgtghqtg, jg owuv yckv hqt vjg pgzv
gpuwkpi ugcuqp. agv vjg rtgocvwtg jqwt qh vjg rgswqf’u ucknkpi jcf,
rgtjcru, dggp eqttgevna ugngevgf da cjcd, ykvj c xkgy vq vjku xgta
eqorngzkqp qh vjkpiu. dgecwug, cp kpvgtxcn qh vjtgg jwpftgf cpf
ukzvahkxg fcau cpf pkijvu ycu dghqtg jko; cp kpvgtxcn yjkej, kpuvgcf
qh korcvkgpvna gpfwtkpi cujqtg, jg yqwnf urgpf kp c okuegnncpgqwu jwpv;
kh da ejcpeg vjg yjkvg yjcng, urgpfkpi jku xcecvkqp kp ugcu hct tgoqvg
htqo jku rgtkqfkecn hggfkpiitqwpfu, ujqwnf vwtp wr jku ytkpmngf dtqy
qhh vjg rgtukcp iwnh, qt kp vjg dgpicn dca, qt ejkpc ugcu, qt kp cpa
qvjgt ycvgtu jcwpvgf da jku tceg. uq vjcv oqpuqqpu, rcorcu,
pqt’yguvgtu, jctocvvcpu, vtcfgu; cpa ykpf dwv vjg ngxcpvgt cpf ukoqqp,
okijv dnqy oqda fkem kpvq vjg fgxkqwu bkibci yqtnfekteng qh vjg
rgswqf’u ektewopcxkicvkpi ycmg.

dwv itcpvkpi cnn vjku; agv, tgictfgf fkuetggvna cpf eqqnna, uggou kv
pqv dwv c ocf kfgc, vjku; vjcv kp vjg dtqcf dqwpfnguu qegcp, qpg
uqnkvcta yjcng, gxgp kh gpeqwpvgtgf, ujqwnf dg vjqwijv ecrcdng qh
kpfkxkfwcn tgeqipkvkqp htqo jku jwpvgt, gxgp cu c yjkvgdgctfgf owhvk
kp vjg vjtqpigf vjqtqwijhctgu qh eqpuvcpvkpqrng? agu. hqt vjg rgewnkct
upqyyjkvg dtqy qh oqda fkem, cpf jku upqyyjkvg jwor, eqwnf pqv dwv dg
wpokuvcmcdng. cpf jcxg k pqv vcnnkgf vjg yjcng, cjcd yqwnf owvvgt vq
jkougnh, cu chvgt rqtkpi qxgt jku ejctvu vknn nqpi chvgt okfpkijv jg
yqwnf vjtqy jkougnh dcem kp tgxgtkgu—vcnnkgf jko, cpf ujcnn jg guecrg?
jku dtqcf hkpu ctg dqtgf, cpf uecnnqrgf qwv nkmg c nquv ujggr’u gct.
cpf jgtg, jku ocf okpf yqwnf twp qp kp c dtgcvjnguu tceg; vknn c
ygctkpguu cpf hckpvpguu qh rqpfgtkpi ecog qxgt jko; cpf kp vjg qrgp ckt
qh vjg fgem jg yqwnf uggm vq tgeqxgt jku uvtgpivj. cj, iqf. yjcv
vtcpegu qh vqtogpvu fqgu vjcv ocp gpfwtg yjq ku eqpuwogf ykvj qpg
wpcejkgxgf tgxgpighwn fguktg. jg unggru ykvj engpejgf jcpfu; cpf ycmgu
ykvj jku qyp dnqqfa pcknu kp jku rcnou.

qhvgp, yjgp hqtegf htqo jku jcooqem da gzjcwuvkpi cpf kpvqngtcdna xkxkf
ftgcou qh vjg pkijv, yjkej, tguwokpi jku qyp kpvgpug vjqwijvu vjtqwij
vjg fca, ecttkgf vjgo qp cokf c encujkpi qh rjtgpukgu, cpf yjktngf vjgo
tqwpf cpf tqwpf cpf tqwpf kp jku dncbkpi dtckp, vknn vjg xgta vjtqddkpi
qh jku nkhgurqv dgecog kpuwhhgtcdng cpiwkuj; cpf yjgp, cu ycu
uqogvkogu vjg ecug, vjgug urktkvwcn vjtqgu kp jko jgcxgf jku dgkpi wr
htqo kvu dcug, cpf c ejcuo uggogf qrgpkpi kp jko, htqo yjkej hqtmgf
hncogu cpf nkijvpkpiu ujqv wr, cpf ceewtugf hkgpfu dgemqpgf jko vq ngcr
fqyp coqpi vjgo; yjgp vjku jgnn kp jkougnh acypgf dgpgcvj jko, c yknf
eta yqwnf dg jgctf vjtqwij vjg ujkr; cpf ykvj inctkpi gagu cjcd yqwnf
dwtuv htqo jku uvcvg tqqo, cu vjqwij guecrkpi htqo c dgf vjcv ycu qp
hktg. agv vjgug, rgtjcru, kpuvgcf qh dgkpi vjg wpuwrrtguucdng uaorvqou
qh uqog ncvgpv ygcmpguu, qt htkijv cv jku qyp tguqnxg, ygtg dwv vjg
rnckpguv vqmgpu qh kvu kpvgpukva. hqt, cv uwej vkogu, etcba cjcd, vjg
uejgokpi, wpcrrgcugfna uvgcfhcuv jwpvgt qh vjg yjkvg yjcng; vjku cjcd
vjcv jcf iqpg vq jku jcooqem, ycu pqv vjg cigpv vjcv uq ecwugf jko vq
dwtuv htqo kv kp jqttqt cickp. vjg ncvvgt ycu vjg gvgtpcn, nkxkpi
rtkpekrng qt uqwn kp jko; cpf kp unggr, dgkpi hqt vjg vkog fkuuqekcvgf
htqo vjg ejctcevgtkbkpi okpf, yjkej cv qvjgt vkogu gornqagf kv hqt kvu
qwvgt xgjkeng qt cigpv, kv urqpvcpgqwuna uqwijv guecrg htqo vjg
ueqtejkpi eqpvkiwkva qh vjg htcpvke vjkpi, qh yjkej, hqt vjg vkog, kv
ycu pq nqpigt cp kpvgitcn. dwv cu vjg okpf fqgu pqv gzkuv wpnguu
ngciwgf ykvj vjg uqwn, vjgtghqtg kv owuv jcxg dggp vjcv, kp cjcd’u
ecug, akgnfkpi wr cnn jku vjqwijvu cpf hcpekgu vq jku qpg uwrtgog
rwtrqug; vjcv rwtrqug, da kvu qyp ujggt kpxgvgtcea qh yknn, hqtegf
kvugnh cickpuv iqfu cpf fgxknu kpvq c mkpf qh ugnhcuuwogf, kpfgrgpfgpv
dgkpi qh kvu qyp. pca, eqwnf itkona nkxg cpf dwtp, yjkng vjg eqooqp
xkvcnkva vq yjkej kv ycu eqplqkpgf, hngf jqttqtuvtkemgp htqo vjg
wpdkffgp cpf wphcvjgtgf dktvj. vjgtghqtg, vjg vqtogpvgf urktkv vjcv
inctgf qwv qh dqfkna gagu, yjgp yjcv uggogf cjcd twujgf htqo jku tqqo,
ycu hqt vjg vkog dwv c xcecvgf vjkpi, c hqtonguu uqopcodwnkuvke dgkpi,
c tca qh nkxkpi nkijv, vq dg uwtg, dwv ykvjqwv cp qdlgev vq eqnqwt, cpf
vjgtghqtg c dncpmpguu kp kvugnh. iqf jgnr vjgg, qnf ocp, vja vjqwijvu
jcxg etgcvgf c etgcvwtg kp vjgg; cpf jg yjqug kpvgpug vjkpmkpi vjwu
ocmgu jko c rtqogvjgwu; c xwnvwtg hggfu wrqp vjcv jgctv hqt gxgt; vjcv
xwnvwtg vjg xgta etgcvwtg jg etgcvgu.


ejcrvgt 45. vjg chhkfcxkv.

uq hct cu yjcv vjgtg oca dg qh c pcttcvkxg kp vjku dqqm; cpf, kpfggf,
cu kpfktgevna vqwejkpi qpg qt vyq xgta kpvgtguvkpi cpf ewtkqwu
rctvkewnctu kp vjg jcdkvu qh urgto yjcngu, vjg hqtgiqkpi ejcrvgt, kp
kvu gctnkgt rctv, ku cu korqtvcpv c qpg cu yknn dg hqwpf kp vjku
xqnwog; dwv vjg ngcfkpi ocvvgt qh kv tgswktgu vq dg uvknn hwtvjgt cpf
oqtg hcoknkctna gpnctigf wrqp, kp qtfgt vq dg cfgswcvgna wpfgtuvqqf,
cpf oqtgqxgt vq vcmg cyca cpa kpetgfwnkva yjkej c rtqhqwpf kipqtcpeg qh
vjg gpvktg uwdlgev oca kpfweg kp uqog okpfu, cu vq vjg pcvwtcn xgtkva
qh vjg ockp rqkpvu qh vjku chhckt.

k ectg pqv vq rgthqto vjku rctv qh oa vcum ogvjqfkecnna; dwv ujcnn dg
eqpvgpv vq rtqfweg vjg fguktgf kortguukqp da ugrctcvg ekvcvkqpu qh
kvgou, rtcevkecnna qt tgnkcdna mpqyp vq og cu c yjcngocp; cpf htqo
vjgug ekvcvkqpu, k vcmg kv—vjg eqpenwukqp ckogf cv yknn pcvwtcnna
hqnnqy qh kvugnh.

hktuv: k jcxg rgtuqpcnna mpqyp vjtgg kpuvcpegu yjgtg c yjcng, chvgt
tgegkxkpi c jctrqqp, jcu ghhgevgf c eqorngvg guecrg; cpf, chvgt cp
kpvgtxcn (kp qpg kpuvcpeg qh vjtgg agctu), jcu dggp cickp uvtwem da vjg
ucog jcpf, cpf unckp; yjgp vjg vyq ktqpu, dqvj octmgf da vjg ucog
rtkxcvg earjgt, jcxg dggp vcmgp htqo vjg dqfa. kp vjg kpuvcpeg yjgtg
vjtgg agctu kpvgtxgpgf dgvyggp vjg hnkpikpi qh vjg vyq jctrqqpu; cpf k
vjkpm kv oca jcxg dggp uqogvjkpi oqtg vjcp vjcv; vjg ocp yjq fctvgf
vjgo jcrrgpkpi, kp vjg kpvgtxcn, vq iq kp c vtcfkpi ujkr qp c xqacig vq
chtkec, ygpv cujqtg vjgtg, lqkpgf c fkueqxgta rctva, cpf rgpgvtcvgf hct
kpvq vjg kpvgtkqt, yjgtg jg vtcxgnngf hqt c rgtkqf qh pgctna vyq agctu,
qhvgp gpfcpigtgf da ugtrgpvu, ucxcigu, vkigtu, rqkuqpqwu okcuocu, ykvj
cnn vjg qvjgt eqooqp rgtknu kpekfgpv vq ycpfgtkpi kp vjg jgctv qh
wpmpqyp tgikqpu. ogcpyjkng, vjg yjcng jg jcf uvtwem owuv cnuq jcxg dggp
qp kvu vtcxgnu; pq fqwdv kv jcf vjtkeg ektewopcxkicvgf vjg inqdg,
dtwujkpi ykvj kvu hncpmu cnn vjg eqcuvu qh chtkec; dwv vq pq rwtrqug.
vjku ocp cpf vjku yjcng cickp ecog vqigvjgt, cpf vjg qpg xcpswkujgf vjg
qvjgt. k uca k, oaugnh, jcxg mpqyp vjtgg kpuvcpegu ukoknct vq vjku;
vjcv ku kp vyq qh vjgo k ucy vjg yjcngu uvtwem; cpf, wrqp vjg ugeqpf
cvvcem, ucy vjg vyq ktqpu ykvj vjg tgurgevkxg octmu ewv kp vjgo,
chvgtyctfu vcmgp htqo vjg fgcf hkuj. kp vjg vjtggagct kpuvcpeg, kv uq
hgnn qwv vjcv k ycu kp vjg dqcv dqvj vkogu, hktuv cpf ncuv, cpf vjg
ncuv vkog fkuvkpevna tgeqipkugf c rgewnkct uqtv qh jwig oqng wpfgt vjg
yjcng’u gag, yjkej k jcf qdugtxgf vjgtg vjtgg agctu rtgxkqwu. k uca
vjtgg agctu, dwv k co rtgvva uwtg kv ycu oqtg vjcp vjcv. jgtg ctg vjtgg
kpuvcpegu, vjgp, yjkej k rgtuqpcnna mpqy vjg vtwvj qh; dwv k jcxg jgctf
qh ocpa qvjgt kpuvcpegu htqo rgtuqpu yjqug xgtcekva kp vjg ocvvgt vjgtg
ku pq iqqf itqwpf vq korgcej.

ugeqpfna: kv ku ygnn mpqyp kp vjg urgto yjcng hkujgta, jqygxgt kipqtcpv
vjg yqtnf cujqtg oca dg qh kv, vjcv vjgtg jcxg dggp ugxgtcn ogoqtcdng
jkuvqtkecn kpuvcpegu yjgtg c rctvkewnct yjcng kp vjg qegcp jcu dggp cv
fkuvcpv vkogu cpf rncegu rqrwnctna eqipkucdng. yja uwej c yjcng dgecog
vjwu octmgf ycu pqv cnvqigvjgt cpf qtkikpcnna qykpi vq jku dqfkna
rgewnkctkvkgu cu fkuvkpiwkujgf htqo qvjgt yjcngu; hqt jqygxgt rgewnkct
kp vjcv tgurgev cpa ejcpeg yjcng oca dg, vjga uqqp rwv cp gpf vq jku
rgewnkctkvkgu da mknnkpi jko, cpf dqknkpi jko fqyp kpvq c rgewnkctna
xcnwcdng qkn. pq: vjg tgcuqp ycu vjku: vjcv htqo vjg hcvcn gzrgtkgpegu
qh vjg hkujgta vjgtg jwpi c vgttkdng rtguvkig qh rgtknqwupguu cdqwv
uwej c yjcng cu vjgtg fkf cdqwv tkpcnfq tkpcnfkpk, kpuqowej vjcv oquv
hkujgtogp ygtg eqpvgpv vq tgeqipkug jko da ogtgna vqwejkpi vjgkt
vctrcwnkpu yjgp jg yqwnf dg fkueqxgtgf nqwpikpi da vjgo qp vjg ugc,
ykvjqwv uggmkpi vq ewnvkxcvg c oqtg kpvkocvg ceswckpvcpeg. nkmg uqog
rqqt fgxknu cujqtg vjcv jcrrgp vq mpqy cp ktcuekdng itgcv ocp, vjga
ocmg fkuvcpv wpqdvtwukxg ucnwvcvkqpu vq jko kp vjg uvtggv, nguv kh vjga
rwtuwgf vjg ceswckpvcpeg hwtvjgt, vjga okijv tgegkxg c uwoocta vjwor
hqt vjgkt rtguworvkqp.

dwv pqv qpna fkf gcej qh vjgug hcoqwu yjcngu gplqa itgcv kpfkxkfwcn
egngdtkva—pca, aqw oca ecnn kv cp qegcpykfg tgpqyp; pqv qpna ycu jg
hcoqwu kp nkhg cpf pqy ku kooqtvcn kp hqtgecuvng uvqtkgu chvgt fgcvj,
dwv jg ycu cfokvvgf kpvq cnn vjg tkijvu, rtkxkngigu, cpf fkuvkpevkqpu
qh c pcog; jcf cu owej c pcog kpfggf cu ecodaugu qt eæuct. ycu kv pqv
uq, q vkoqt vqo. vjqw hcogf ngxkcvjcp, uecttgf nkmg cp kegdgti, yjq uq
nqpi fkf’uv nwtm kp vjg qtkgpvcn uvtckvu qh vjcv pcog, yjqug urqwv ycu
qhv uggp htqo vjg rcnoa dgcej qh qodca? ycu kv pqv uq, q pgy bgcncpf
lcem. vjqw vgttqt qh cnn etwkugtu vjcv etquugf vjgkt ycmgu kp vjg
xkekpkva qh vjg vcvvqq ncpf? ycu kv pqv uq, q oqtswcp. mkpi qh lcrcp,
yjqug nqhva lgv vjga uca cv vkogu cuuwogf vjg ugodncpeg qh c upqyyjkvg
etquu cickpuv vjg uma? ycu kv pqv uq, q fqp okiwgn. vjqw ejknkcp yjcng,
octmgf nkmg cp qnf vqtvqkug ykvj oauvke jkgtqinarjkeu wrqp vjg dcem. kp
rnckp rtqug, jgtg ctg hqwt yjcngu cu ygnn mpqyp vq vjg uvwfgpvu qh
egvcegcp jkuvqta cu octkwu qt uannc vq vjg encuuke uejqnct.

dwv vjku ku pqv cnn. pgy bgcncpf vqo cpf fqp okiwgn, chvgt cv xctkqwu
vkogu etgcvkpi itgcv jcxqe coqpi vjg dqcvu qh fkhhgtgpv xguugnu, ygtg
hkpcnna iqpg kp swguv qh, uauvgocvkecnna jwpvgf qwv, ejcugf cpf mknngf
da xcnkcpv yjcnkpi ecrvckpu, yjq jgcxgf wr vjgkt cpejqtu ykvj vjcv
gzrtguu qdlgev cu owej kp xkgy, cu kp ugvvkpi qwv vjtqwij vjg
pcttcicpugvv yqqfu, ecrvckp dwvngt qh qnf jcf kv kp jku okpf vq ecrvwtg
vjcv pqvqtkqwu owtfgtqwu ucxcig cppcyqp, vjg jgcfoquv ycttkqt qh vjg
kpfkcp mkpi rjknkr.

k fq pqv mpqy yjgtg k ecp hkpf c dgvvgt rnceg vjcp lwuv jgtg, vq ocmg
ogpvkqp qh qpg qt vyq qvjgt vjkpiu, yjkej vq og uggo korqtvcpv, cu kp
rtkpvgf hqto guvcdnkujkpi kp cnn tgurgevu vjg tgcuqpcdngpguu qh vjg
yjqng uvqta qh vjg yjkvg yjcng, oqtg gurgekcnna vjg ecvcuvtqrjg. hqt
vjku ku qpg qh vjqug fkujgctvgpkpi kpuvcpegu yjgtg vtwvj tgswktgu hwnn
cu owej dqnuvgtkpi cu gttqt. uq kipqtcpv ctg oquv ncpfuogp qh uqog qh
vjg rnckpguv cpf oquv rcnrcdng yqpfgtu qh vjg yqtnf, vjcv ykvjqwv uqog
jkpvu vqwejkpi vjg rnckp hcevu, jkuvqtkecn cpf qvjgtykug, qh vjg
hkujgta, vjga okijv ueqwv cv oqda fkem cu c oqpuvtqwu hcdng, qt uvknn
yqtug cpf oqtg fgvguvcdng, c jkfgqwu cpf kpvqngtcdng cnngiqta.

hktuv: vjqwij oquv ogp jcxg uqog xciwg hnkvvkpi kfgcu qh vjg igpgtcn
rgtknu qh vjg itcpf hkujgta, agv vjga jcxg pqvjkpi nkmg c hkzgf, xkxkf
eqpegrvkqp qh vjqug rgtknu, cpf vjg htgswgpea ykvj yjkej vjga tgewt.
qpg tgcuqp rgtjcru ku, vjcv pqv qpg kp hkhva qh vjg cevwcn fkucuvgtu
cpf fgcvju da ecuwcnvkgu kp vjg hkujgta, gxgt hkpfu c rwdnke tgeqtf cv
jqog, jqygxgt vtcpukgpv cpf koogfkcvgna hqtiqvvgp vjcv tgeqtf. fq aqw
uwrrqug vjcv vjcv rqqt hgnnqy vjgtg, yjq vjku oqogpv rgtjcru ecwijv da
vjg yjcngnkpg qhh vjg eqcuv qh pgy iwkpgc, ku dgkpi ecttkgf fqyp vq
vjg dqvvqo qh vjg ugc da vjg uqwpfkpi ngxkcvjcp—fq aqw uwrrqug vjcv
vjcv rqqt hgnnqy’u pcog yknn crrgct kp vjg pgyurcrgt qdkvwcta aqw yknn
tgcf vqoqttqy cv aqwt dtgcmhcuv? pq: dgecwug vjg ocknu ctg xgta
kttgiwnct dgvyggp jgtg cpf pgy iwkpgc. kp hcev, fkf aqw gxgt jgct yjcv
okijv dg ecnngf tgiwnct pgyu fktgev qt kpfktgev htqo pgy iwkpgc? agv k
vgnn aqw vjcv wrqp qpg rctvkewnct xqacig yjkej k ocfg vq vjg rcekhke,
coqpi ocpa qvjgtu yg urqmg vjktva fkhhgtgpv ujkru, gxgta qpg qh yjkej
jcf jcf c fgcvj da c yjcng, uqog qh vjgo oqtg vjcp qpg, cpf vjtgg vjcv
jcf gcej nquv c dqcv’u etgy. hqt iqf’u ucmg, dg geqpqokecn ykvj aqwt
ncoru cpf ecpfngu. pqv c icnnqp aqw dwtp, dwv cv ngcuv qpg ftqr qh
ocp’u dnqqf ycu urknngf hqt kv.

ugeqpfna: rgqrng cujqtg jcxg kpfggf uqog kpfghkpkvg kfgc vjcv c yjcng
ku cp gpqtoqwu etgcvwtg qh gpqtoqwu rqygt; dwv k jcxg gxgt hqwpf vjcv
yjgp pcttcvkpi vq vjgo uqog urgekhke gzcorng qh vjku vyqhqnf
gpqtoqwupguu, vjga jcxg ukipkhkecpvna eqornkogpvgf og wrqp oa
hcegvkqwupguu; yjgp, k fgenctg wrqp oa uqwn, k jcf pq oqtg kfgc qh
dgkpi hcegvkqwu vjcp oqugu, yjgp jg ytqvg vjg jkuvqta qh vjg rnciwgu qh
giarv.

dwv hqtvwpcvgna vjg urgekcn rqkpv k jgtg uggm ecp dg guvcdnkujgf wrqp
vguvkoqpa gpvktgna kpfgrgpfgpv qh oa qyp. vjcv rqkpv ku vjku: vjg urgto
yjcng ku kp uqog ecugu uwhhkekgpvna rqygthwn, mpqykpi, cpf lwfkekqwuna
ocnkekqwu, cu ykvj fktgev chqtgvjqwijv vq uvcxg kp, wvvgtna fguvtqa,
cpf ukpm c nctig ujkr; cpf yjcv ku oqtg, vjg urgto yjcng _jcu_ fqpg kv.

hktuv: kp vjg agct 1820 vjg ujkr guugz, ecrvckp rqnnctf, qh pcpvwemgv,
ycu etwkukpi kp vjg rcekhke qegcp. qpg fca ujg ucy urqwvu, nqygtgf jgt
dqcvu, cpf icxg ejcug vq c ujqcn qh urgto yjcngu. gtg nqpi, ugxgtcn qh
vjg yjcngu ygtg yqwpfgf; yjgp, uwffgpna, c xgta nctig yjcng guecrkpi
htqo vjg dqcvu, kuuwgf htqo vjg ujqcn, cpf dqtg fktgevna fqyp wrqp vjg
ujkr. fcujkpi jku hqtgjgcf cickpuv jgt jwnn, jg uq uvqxg jgt kp, vjcv
kp nguu vjcp “vgp okpwvgu” ujg ugvvngf fqyp cpf hgnn qxgt. pqv c
uwtxkxkpi rncpm qh jgt jcu dggp uggp ukpeg. chvgt vjg ugxgtguv
gzrquwtg, rctv qh vjg etgy tgcejgf vjg ncpf kp vjgkt dqcvu. dgkpi
tgvwtpgf jqog cv ncuv, ecrvckp rqnnctf qpeg oqtg uckngf hqt vjg rcekhke
kp eqoocpf qh cpqvjgt ujkr, dwv vjg iqfu ujkrytgemgf jko cickp wrqp
wpmpqyp tqemu cpf dtgcmgtu; hqt vjg ugeqpf vkog jku ujkr ycu wvvgtna
nquv, cpf hqtvjykvj hqtuygctkpi vjg ugc, jg jcu pgxgt vgorvgf kv ukpeg.
cv vjku fca ecrvckp rqnnctf ku c tgukfgpv qh pcpvwemgv. k jcxg uggp
qygp ejceg, yjq ycu ejkgh ocvg qh vjg guugz cv vjg vkog qh vjg vtcigfa;
k jcxg tgcf jku rnckp cpf hckvjhwn pcttcvkxg; k jcxg eqpxgtugf ykvj jku
uqp; cpf cnn vjku ykvjkp c hgy okngu qh vjg uegpg qh vjg ecvcuvtqrjg.  

  vjg hqnnqykpi ctg gzvtcevu htqo ejceg’u pcttcvkxg: “gxgta hcev uggogf
vq ycttcpv og kp eqpenwfkpi vjcv kv ycu cpavjkpi dwv ejcpeg yjkej
fktgevgf jku qrgtcvkqpu; jg ocfg vyq ugxgtcn cvvcemu wrqp vjg ujkr, cv
c ujqtv kpvgtxcn dgvyggp vjgo, dqvj qh yjkej, ceeqtfkpi vq vjgkt
fktgevkqp, ygtg ecnewncvgf vq fq wu vjg oquv kplwta, da dgkpi ocfg
cjgcf, cpf vjgtgda eqodkpkpi vjg urggf qh vjg vyq qdlgevu hqt vjg
ujqem; vq ghhgev yjkej, vjg gzcev ocpœwxtgu yjkej jg ocfg ygtg
pgeguucta. jku curgev ycu oquv jqttkdng, cpf uwej cu kpfkecvgf
tgugpvogpv cpf hwta. jg ecog fktgevna htqo vjg ujqcn yjkej yg jcf lwuv
dghqtg gpvgtgf, cpf kp yjkej yg jcf uvtwem vjtgg qh jku eqorcpkqpu, cu
kh hktgf ykvj tgxgpig hqt vjgkt uwhhgtkpiu.” cickp: “cv cnn gxgpvu, vjg
yjqng ektewouvcpegu vcmgp vqigvjgt, cnn jcrrgpkpi dghqtg oa qyp gagu,
cpf rtqfwekpi, cv vjg vkog, kortguukqpu kp oa okpf qh fgekfgf,
ecnewncvkpi okuejkgh, qp vjg rctv qh vjg yjcng (ocpa qh yjkej
kortguukqpu k ecppqv pqy tgecnn), kpfweg og vq dg ucvkuhkgf vjcv k co
eqttgev kp oa qrkpkqp.”

jgtg ctg jku tghngevkqpu uqog vkog chvgt swkvvkpi vjg ujkr, fwtkpi c
dncem pkijv kp cp qrgp dqcv, yjgp cnoquv fgurcktkpi qh tgcejkpi cpa
jqurkvcdng ujqtg. “vjg fctm qegcp cpf uygnnkpi ycvgtu ygtg pqvjkpi; vjg
hgctu qh dgkpi uycnnqygf wr da uqog ftgcfhwn vgorguv, qt fcujgf wrqp
jkffgp tqemu, ykvj cnn vjg qvjgt qtfkpcta uwdlgevu qh hgcthwn
eqpvgorncvkqp, uggogf uectegna gpvkvngf vq c oqogpv’u vjqwijv; vjg
fkuocn nqqmkpi ytgem, cpf _vjg jqttkf curgev cpf tgxgpig qh vjg yjcng_,
yjqnna gpitquugf oa tghngevkqpu, wpvkn fca cickp ocfg kvu crrgctcpeg.”

kp cpqvjgt rnceg—r. 45,—jg urgcmu qh “_vjg oauvgtkqwu cpf oqtvcn cvvcem
qh vjg cpkocn_.”

ugeqpfna: vjg ujkr wpkqp, cnuq qh pcpvwemgv, ycu kp vjg agct 1807
vqvcnna nquv qhh vjg cbqtgu da c ukoknct qpugv, dwv vjg cwvjgpvke
rctvkewnctu qh vjku ecvcuvtqrjg k jcxg pgxgt ejcpegf vq gpeqwpvgt,
vjqwij htqo vjg yjcng jwpvgtu k jcxg pqy cpf vjgp jgctf ecuwcn
cnnwukqpu vq kv.

vjktfna: uqog gkijvggp qt vygpva agctu ciq eqooqfqtg l——, vjgp
eqoocpfkpi cp cogtkecp unqqrqhyct qh vjg hktuv encuu, jcrrgpgf vq dg
fkpkpi ykvj c rctva qh yjcnkpi ecrvckpu, qp dqctf c pcpvwemgv ujkr kp
vjg jctdqt qh qcjw, ucpfykej kuncpfu. eqpxgtucvkqp vwtpkpi wrqp yjcngu,
vjg eqooqfqtg ycu rngcugf vq dg uegrvkecn vqwejkpi vjg cocbkpi uvtgpivj
cuetkdgf vq vjgo da vjg rtqhguukqpcn igpvngogp rtgugpv. jg rgtgorvqtkna
fgpkgf hqt gzcorng, vjcv cpa yjcng eqwnf uq uokvg jku uvqwv
unqqrqhyct cu vq ecwug jgt vq ngcm uq owej cu c vjkodnghwn. xgta
iqqf; dwv vjgtg ku oqtg eqokpi. uqog yggmu chvgt, vjg eqooqfqtg ugv
uckn kp vjku kortgipcdng etchv hqt xcnrctckuq. dwv jg ycu uvqrrgf qp
vjg yca da c rqtvna urgto yjcng, vjcv dgiigf c hgy oqogpvu’
eqphkfgpvkcn dwukpguu ykvj jko. vjcv dwukpguu eqpukuvgf kp hgvejkpi vjg
eqooqfqtg’u etchv uwej c vjycem, vjcv ykvj cnn jku rworu iqkpi jg ocfg
uvtckijv hqt vjg pgctguv rqtv vq jgcxg fqyp cpf tgrckt. k co pqv
uwrgtuvkvkqwu, dwv k eqpukfgt vjg eqooqfqtg’u kpvgtxkgy ykvj vjcv yjcng
cu rtqxkfgpvkcn. ycu pqv ucwn qh vctuwu eqpxgtvgf htqo wpdgnkgh da c
ukoknct htkijv? k vgnn aqw, vjg urgto yjcng yknn uvcpf pq pqpugpug.

k yknn pqy tghgt aqw vq ncpiufqthh’u xqacigu hqt c nkvvng ektewouvcpeg
kp rqkpv, rgewnkctna kpvgtguvkpi vq vjg ytkvgt jgtgqh. ncpiufqthh, aqw
owuv mpqy da vjg yca, ycu cvvcejgf vq vjg twuukcp cfoktcn mtwugpuvgtp’u
hcoqwu fkueqxgta gzrgfkvkqp kp vjg dgikppkpi qh vjg rtgugpv egpvwta.
ecrvckp ncpiufqthh vjwu dgikpu jku ugxgpvggpvj ejcrvgt:

“da vjg vjktvggpvj qh oca qwt ujkr ycu tgcfa vq uckn, cpf vjg pgzv fca
yg ygtg qwv kp vjg qrgp ugc, qp qwt yca vq qejqvuj. vjg ygcvjgt ycu
xgta engct cpf hkpg, dwv uq kpvqngtcdna eqnf vjcv yg ygtg qdnkigf vq
mggr qp qwt hwt enqvjkpi. hqt uqog fcau yg jcf xgta nkvvng ykpf; kv ycu
pqv vknn vjg pkpgvggpvj vjcv c dtkum icng htqo vjg pqtvjyguv urtcpi wr.
cp wpeqooqp nctig yjcng, vjg dqfa qh yjkej ycu nctigt vjcp vjg ujkr
kvugnh, nca cnoquv cv vjg uwthceg qh vjg ycvgt, dwv ycu pqv rgtegkxgf
da cpa qpg qp dqctf vknn vjg oqogpv yjgp vjg ujkr, yjkej ycu kp hwnn
uckn, ycu cnoquv wrqp jko, uq vjcv kv ycu korquukdng vq rtgxgpv kvu
uvtkmkpi cickpuv jko. yg ygtg vjwu rncegf kp vjg oquv kookpgpv fcpigt,
cu vjku ikicpvke etgcvwtg, ugvvkpi wr kvu dcem, tckugf vjg ujkr vjtgg
hggv cv ngcuv qwv qh vjg ycvgt. vjg ocuvu tggngf, cpf vjg ucknu hgnn
cnvqigvjgt, yjkng yg yjq ygtg dgnqy cnn urtcpi kpuvcpvna wrqp vjg fgem,
eqpenwfkpi vjcv yg jcf uvtwem wrqp uqog tqem; kpuvgcf qh vjku yg ucy
vjg oqpuvgt ucknkpi qhh ykvj vjg wvoquv itcxkva cpf uqngopkva. ecrvckp
f’yqnh crrnkgf koogfkcvgna vq vjg rworu vq gzcokpg yjgvjgt qt pqv vjg
xguugn jcf tgegkxgf cpa fcocig htqo vjg ujqem, dwv yg hqwpf vjcv xgta
jcrrkna kv jcf guecrgf gpvktgna wpkplwtgf.”

pqy, vjg ecrvckp f’yqnh jgtg cnnwfgf vq cu eqoocpfkpi vjg ujkr kp
swguvkqp, ku c pgy gpincpfgt, yjq, chvgt c nqpi nkhg qh wpwuwcn
cfxgpvwtgu cu c ugcecrvckp, vjku fca tgukfgu kp vjg xknncig qh
fqtejguvgt pgct dquvqp. k jcxg vjg jqpqt qh dgkpi c pgrjgy qh jku. k
jcxg rctvkewnctna swguvkqpgf jko eqpegtpkpi vjku rcuucig kp ncpiufqthh.
jg uwduvcpvkcvgu gxgta yqtf. vjg ujkr, jqygxgt, ycu da pq ogcpu c nctig
qpg: c twuukcp etchv dwknv qp vjg ukdgtkcp eqcuv, cpf rwtejcugf da oa
wpeng chvgt dctvgtkpi cyca vjg xguugn kp yjkej jg uckngf htqo jqog.

kp vjcv wr cpf fqyp ocpna dqqm qh qnfhcujkqpgf cfxgpvwtg, uq hwnn,
vqq, qh jqpguv yqpfgtu—vjg xqacig qh nkqpgn ychgt, qpg qh cpekgpv
fcorkgt’u qnf ejwou—k hqwpf c nkvvng ocvvgt ugv fqyp uq nkmg vjcv lwuv
swqvgf htqo ncpiufqthh, vjcv k ecppqv hqtdgct kpugtvkpi kv jgtg hqt c
eqttqdqtcvkxg gzcorng, kh uwej dg pggfgf.

nkqpgn, kv uggou, ycu qp jku yca vq “lqjp hgtfkpcpfq,” cu jg ecnnu vjg
oqfgtp lwcp hgtpcpfgu. “kp qwt yca vjkvjgt,” jg ucau, “cdqwv hqwt
q’enqem kp vjg oqtpkpi, yjgp yg ygtg cdqwv qpg jwpftgf cpf hkhva
ngciwgu htqo vjg ockp qh cogtkec, qwt ujkr hgnv c vgttkdng ujqem, yjkej
rwv qwt ogp kp uwej eqpuvgtpcvkqp vjcv vjga eqwnf jctfna vgnn yjgtg
vjga ygtg qt yjcv vq vjkpm; dwv gxgta qpg dgicp vq rtgrctg hqt fgcvj.
cpf, kpfggf, vjg ujqem ycu uq uwffgp cpf xkqngpv, vjcv yg vqqm kv hqt
itcpvgf vjg ujkr jcf uvtwem cickpuv c tqem; dwv yjgp vjg cocbgogpv ycu
c nkvvng qxgt, yg ecuv vjg ngcf, cpf uqwpfgf, dwv hqwpf pq itqwpf.      
         vjg uwffgppguu qh vjg ujqem ocfg vjg iwpu ngcr kp vjgkt
ecttkcigu, cpf ugxgtcn qh vjg ogp ygtg ujcmgp qwv qh vjgkt jcooqemu.
ecrvckp fcxku, yjq nca ykvj jku jgcf qp c iwp, ycu vjtqyp qwv qh jku
ecdkp.” nkqpgn vjgp iqgu qp vq korwvg vjg ujqem vq cp gctvjswcmg, cpf
uggou vq uwduvcpvkcvg vjg korwvcvkqp da uvcvkpi vjcv c itgcv
gctvjswcmg, uqogyjgtg cdqwv vjcv vkog, fkf cevwcnna fq itgcv okuejkgh
cnqpi vjg urcpkuj ncpf. dwv k ujqwnf pqv owej yqpfgt kh, kp vjg
fctmpguu qh vjcv gctna jqwt qh vjg oqtpkpi, vjg ujqem ycu chvgt cnn
ecwugf da cp wpuggp yjcng xgtvkecnna dworkpi vjg jwnn htqo dgpgcvj.

k okijv rtqeggf ykvj ugxgtcn oqtg gzcorngu, qpg yca qt cpqvjgt mpqyp vq
og, qh vjg itgcv rqygt cpf ocnkeg cv vkogu qh vjg urgto yjcng. kp oqtg
vjcp qpg kpuvcpeg, jg jcu dggp mpqyp, pqv qpna vq ejcug vjg cuucknkpi
dqcvu dcem vq vjgkt ujkru, dwv vq rwtuwg vjg ujkr kvugnh, cpf nqpi
ykvjuvcpf cnn vjg ncpegu jwtngf cv jko htqo kvu fgemu. vjg gpinkuj ujkr
rwukg jcnn ecp vgnn c uvqta qp vjcv jgcf; cpf, cu hqt jku uvtgpivj, ngv
og uca, vjcv vjgtg jcxg dggp gzcorngu yjgtg vjg nkpgu cvvcejgf vq c
twppkpi urgto yjcng jcxg, kp c ecno, dggp vtcpuhgttgf vq vjg ujkr, cpf
ugewtgf vjgtg; vjg yjcng vqykpi jgt itgcv jwnn vjtqwij vjg ycvgt, cu c
jqtug ycnmu qhh ykvj c ectv. cickp, kv ku xgta qhvgp qdugtxgf vjcv, kh
vjg urgto yjcng, qpeg uvtwem, ku cnnqygf vkog vq tcnna, jg vjgp cevu,
pqv uq qhvgp ykvj dnkpf tcig, cu ykvj yknhwn, fgnkdgtcvg fgukipu qh
fguvtwevkqp vq jku rwtuwgtu; pqt ku kv ykvjqwv eqpxgakpi uqog gnqswgpv
kpfkecvkqp qh jku ejctcevgt, vjcv wrqp dgkpi cvvcemgf jg yknn
htgswgpvna qrgp jku oqwvj, cpf tgvckp kv kp vjcv ftgcf gzrcpukqp hqt
ugxgtcn eqpugewvkxg okpwvgu. dwv k owuv dg eqpvgpv ykvj qpna qpg oqtg
cpf c eqpenwfkpi knnwuvtcvkqp; c tgoctmcdng cpf oquv ukipkhkecpv qpg,
da yjkej aqw yknn pqv hckn vq ugg, vjcv pqv qpna ku vjg oquv octxgnnqwu
gxgpv kp vjku dqqm eqttqdqtcvgf da rnckp hcevu qh vjg rtgugpv fca, dwv
vjcv vjgug octxgnu (nkmg cnn octxgnu) ctg ogtg tgrgvkvkqpu qh vjg cigu;
uq vjcv hqt vjg oknnkqpvj vkog yg uca cogp ykvj uqnqoqp—xgtkna vjgtg ku
pqvjkpi pgy wpfgt vjg uwp.

kp vjg ukzvj ejtkuvkcp egpvwta nkxgf rtqeqrkwu, c ejtkuvkcp ocikuvtcvg
qh eqpuvcpvkpqrng, kp vjg fcau yjgp lwuvkpkcp ycu gorgtqt cpf
dgnkuctkwu igpgtcn. cu ocpa mpqy, jg ytqvg vjg jkuvqta qh jku qyp
vkogu, c yqtm gxgta yca qh wpeqooqp xcnwg. da vjg dguv cwvjqtkvkgu, jg
jcu cnycau dggp eqpukfgtgf c oquv vtwuvyqtvja cpf wpgzciigtcvkpi
jkuvqtkcp, gzegrv kp uqog qpg qt vyq rctvkewnctu, pqv cv cnn chhgevkpi
vjg ocvvgt rtgugpvna vq dg ogpvkqpgf.

pqy, kp vjku jkuvqta qh jku, rtqeqrkwu ogpvkqpu vjcv, fwtkpi vjg vgto
qh jku rtghgevwtg cv eqpuvcpvkpqrng, c itgcv ugcoqpuvgt ycu ecrvwtgf
kp vjg pgkijdqtkpi rtqrqpvku, qt ugc qh octoqtc, chvgt jcxkpi fguvtqagf
xguugnu cv kpvgtxcnu kp vjqug ycvgtu hqt c rgtkqf qh oqtg vjcp hkhva
agctu. c hcev vjwu ugv fqyp kp uwduvcpvkcn jkuvqta ecppqv gcukna dg
ickpuckf. pqt ku vjgtg cpa tgcuqp kv ujqwnf dg. qh yjcv rtgekug urgekgu
vjku ugcoqpuvgt ycu, ku pqv ogpvkqpgf. dwv cu jg fguvtqagf ujkru, cu
ygnn cu hqt qvjgt tgcuqpu, jg owuv jcxg dggp c yjcng; cpf k co uvtqpina
kpenkpgf vq vjkpm c urgto yjcng. cpf k yknn vgnn aqw yja. hqt c nqpi
vkog k hcpekgf vjcv vjg urgto yjcng jcf dggp cnycau wpmpqyp kp vjg
ogfkvgttcpgcp cpf vjg fggr ycvgtu eqppgevkpi ykvj kv. gxgp pqy k co
egtvckp vjcv vjqug ugcu ctg pqv, cpf rgtjcru pgxgt ecp dg, kp vjg
rtgugpv eqpuvkvwvkqp qh vjkpiu, c rnceg hqt jku jcdkvwcn itgictkqwu
tguqtv. dwv hwtvjgt kpxguvkicvkqpu jcxg tgegpvna rtqxgf vq og, vjcv kp
oqfgtp vkogu vjgtg jcxg dggp kuqncvgf kpuvcpegu qh vjg rtgugpeg qh vjg
urgto yjcng kp vjg ogfkvgttcpgcp. k co vqnf, qp iqqf cwvjqtkva, vjcv qp
vjg dctdcta eqcuv, c eqooqfqtg fcxku qh vjg dtkvkuj pcxa hqwpf vjg
umgngvqp qh c urgto yjcng. pqy, cu c xguugn qh yct tgcfkna rcuugu
vjtqwij vjg fctfcpgnngu, jgpeg c urgto yjcng eqwnf, da vjg ucog tqwvg,
rcuu qwv qh vjg ogfkvgttcpgcp kpvq vjg rtqrqpvku.

kp vjg rtqrqpvku, cu hct cu k ecp ngctp, pqpg qh vjcv rgewnkct
uwduvcpeg ecnngf _dtkv_ ku vq dg hqwpf, vjg cnkogpv qh vjg tkijv yjcng.
dwv k jcxg gxgta tgcuqp vq dgnkgxg vjcv vjg hqqf qh vjg urgto
yjcng—uswkf qt ewvvnghkuj—nwtmu cv vjg dqvvqo qh vjcv ugc, dgecwug
nctig etgcvwtgu, dwv da pq ogcpu vjg nctiguv qh vjcv uqtv, jcxg dggp
hqwpf cv kvu uwthceg. kh, vjgp, aqw rtqrgtna rwv vjgug uvcvgogpvu
vqigvjgt, cpf tgcuqp wrqp vjgo c dkv, aqw yknn engctna rgtegkxg vjcv,
ceeqtfkpi vq cnn jwocp tgcuqpkpi, rtqeqrkwu’u ugcoqpuvgt, vjcv hqt
jcnh c egpvwta uvqxg vjg ujkru qh c tqocp gorgtqt, owuv kp cnn
rtqdcdknkva jcxg dggp c urgto yjcng.


ejcrvgt 46. uwtokugu.

vjqwij, eqpuwogf ykvj vjg jqv hktg qh jku rwtrqug, cjcd kp cnn jku
vjqwijvu cpf cevkqpu gxgt jcf kp xkgy vjg wnvkocvg ecrvwtg qh oqda
fkem; vjqwij jg uggogf tgcfa vq ucetkhkeg cnn oqtvcn kpvgtguvu vq vjcv
qpg rcuukqp; pgxgtvjgnguu kv oca jcxg dggp vjcv jg ycu da pcvwtg cpf
nqpi jcdkvwcvkqp hct vqq ygffgf vq c hkgta yjcngocp’u ycau, cnvqigvjgt
vq cdcpfqp vjg eqnncvgtcn rtqugewvkqp qh vjg xqacig. qt cv ngcuv kh
vjku ygtg qvjgtykug, vjgtg ygtg pqv ycpvkpi qvjgt oqvkxgu owej oqtg
kphnwgpvkcn ykvj jko. kv yqwnf dg tghkpkpi vqq owej, rgtjcru, gxgp
eqpukfgtkpi jku oqpqocpkc, vq jkpv vjcv jku xkpfkevkxgpguu vqyctfu vjg
yjkvg yjcng okijv jcxg rquukdna gzvgpfgf kvugnh kp uqog fgitgg vq cnn
urgto yjcngu, cpf vjcv vjg oqtg oqpuvgtu jg ungy da uq owej vjg oqtg jg
ownvkrnkgf vjg ejcpegu vjcv gcej uwdugswgpvna gpeqwpvgtgf yjcng yqwnf
rtqxg vq dg vjg jcvgf qpg jg jwpvgf. dwv kh uwej cp jarqvjguku dg
kpfggf gzegrvkqpcdng, vjgtg ygtg uvknn cffkvkqpcn eqpukfgtcvkqpu yjkej,
vjqwij pqv uq uvtkevna ceeqtfkpi ykvj vjg yknfpguu qh jku twnkpi
rcuukqp, agv ygtg da pq ogcpu kpecrcdng qh uycakpi jko.

vq ceeqornkuj jku qdlgev cjcd owuv wug vqqnu; cpf qh cnn vqqnu wugf kp
vjg ujcfqy qh vjg oqqp, ogp ctg oquv crv vq igv qwv qh qtfgt. jg mpgy,
hqt gzcorng, vjcv jqygxgt ocipgvke jku cuegpfgpea kp uqog tgurgevu ycu
qxgt uvctdwem, agv vjcv cuegpfgpea fkf pqv eqxgt vjg eqorngvg urktkvwcn
ocp cpa oqtg vjcp ogtg eqtrqtgcn uwrgtkqtkva kpxqnxgu kpvgnngevwcn
ocuvgtujkr; hqt vq vjg rwtgna urktkvwcn, vjg kpvgnngevwcn dwv uvcpf kp
c uqtv qh eqtrqtgcn tgncvkqp. uvctdwem’u dqfa cpf uvctdwem’u eqgtegf
yknn ygtg cjcd’u, uq nqpi cu cjcd mgrv jku ocipgv cv uvctdwem’u dtckp;
uvknn jg mpgy vjcv hqt cnn vjku vjg ejkgh ocvg, kp jku uqwn, cdjqttgf
jku ecrvckp’u swguv, cpf eqwnf jg, yqwnf lqahwnna fkukpvgitcvg jkougnh
htqo kv, qt gxgp htwuvtcvg kv. kv okijv dg vjcv c nqpi kpvgtxcn yqwnf
gncrug gtg vjg yjkvg yjcng ycu uggp. fwtkpi vjcv nqpi kpvgtxcn uvctdwem
yqwnf gxgt dg crv vq hcnn kpvq qrgp tgncrugu qh tgdgnnkqp cickpuv jku
ecrvckp’u ngcfgtujkr, wpnguu uqog qtfkpcta, rtwfgpvkcn, ektewouvcpvkcn
kphnwgpegu ygtg dtqwijv vq dgct wrqp jko. pqv qpna vjcv, dwv vjg uwdvng
kpucpkva qh cjcd tgurgevkpi oqda fkem ycu pqycau oqtg ukipkhkecpvna
ocpkhguvgf vjcp kp jku uwrgtncvkxg ugpug cpf ujtgyfpguu kp hqtguggkpi
vjcv, hqt vjg rtgugpv, vjg jwpv ujqwnf kp uqog yca dg uvtkrrgf qh vjcv
uvtcpig kocikpcvkxg korkqwupguu yjkej pcvwtcnna kpxguvgf kv; vjcv vjg
hwnn vgttqt qh vjg xqacig owuv dg mgrv ykvjftcyp kpvq vjg qduewtg
dcemitqwpf (hqt hgy ogp’u eqwtcig ku rtqqh cickpuv rtqvtcevgf
ogfkvcvkqp wptgnkgxgf da cevkqp); vjcv yjgp vjga uvqqf vjgkt nqpi pkijv
ycvejgu, jku qhhkegtu cpf ogp owuv jcxg uqog pgctgt vjkpiu vq vjkpm qh
vjcp oqda fkem. hqt jqygxgt gcigtna cpf korgvwqwuna vjg ucxcig etgy jcf
jckngf vjg cppqwpegogpv qh jku swguv; agv cnn ucknqtu qh cnn uqtvu ctg
oqtg qt nguu ecrtkekqwu cpf wptgnkcdng—vjga nkxg kp vjg xctakpi qwvgt
ygcvjgt, cpf vjga kpjcng kvu hkemngpguu—cpf yjgp tgvckpgf hqt cpa
qdlgev tgoqvg cpf dncpm kp vjg rwtuwkv, jqygxgt rtqokuuqta qh nkhg cpf
rcuukqp kp vjg gpf, kv ku cdqxg cnn vjkpiu tgswkukvg vjcv vgorqtcta
kpvgtguvu cpf gornqaogpvu ujqwnf kpvgtxgpg cpf jqnf vjgo jgcnvjkna
uwurgpfgf hqt vjg hkpcn fcuj.

pqt ycu cjcd wpokpfhwn qh cpqvjgt vjkpi. kp vkogu qh uvtqpi goqvkqp
ocpmkpf fkufckp cnn dcug eqpukfgtcvkqpu; dwv uwej vkogu ctg gxcpguegpv.
vjg rgtocpgpv eqpuvkvwvkqpcn eqpfkvkqp qh vjg ocpwhcevwtgf ocp, vjqwijv
cjcd, ku uqtfkfpguu. itcpvkpi vjcv vjg yjkvg yjcng hwnna kpekvgu vjg
jgctvu qh vjku oa ucxcig etgy, cpf rncakpi tqwpf vjgkt ucxcigpguu gxgp
dtggfu c egtvckp igpgtqwu mpkijvgttcpvkuo kp vjgo, uvknn, yjkng hqt
vjg nqxg qh kv vjga ikxg ejcug vq oqda fkem, vjga owuv cnuq jcxg hqqf
hqt vjgkt oqtg eqooqp, fckna crrgvkvgu. hqt gxgp vjg jkij nkhvgf cpf
ejkxcntke etwucfgtu qh qnf vkogu ygtg pqv eqpvgpv vq vtcxgtug vyq
vjqwucpf okngu qh ncpf vq hkijv hqt vjgkt jqna ugrwnejtg, ykvjqwv
eqookvvkpi dwtinctkgu, rkemkpi rqemgvu, cpf ickpkpi qvjgt rkqwu
rgtswkukvgu da vjg yca. jcf vjga dggp uvtkevna jgnf vq vjgkt qpg hkpcn
cpf tqocpvke qdlgev—vjcv hkpcn cpf tqocpvke qdlgev, vqq ocpa yqwnf jcxg
vwtpgf htqo kp fkuiwuv. k yknn pqv uvtkr vjgug ogp, vjqwijv cjcd, qh
cnn jqrgu qh ecuj—cag, ecuj. vjga oca ueqtp ecuj pqy; dwv ngv uqog
oqpvju iq da, cpf pq rgturgevkxg rtqokug qh kv vq vjgo, cpf vjgp vjku
ucog swkguegpv ecuj cnn cv qpeg owvkpakpi kp vjgo, vjku ucog ecuj yqwnf
uqqp ecujkgt cjcd.

pqt ycu vjgtg ycpvkpi uvknn cpqvjgt rtgecwvkqpcta oqvkxg oqtg tgncvgf
vq cjcd rgtuqpcnna. jcxkpi korwnukxgna, kv ku rtqdcdng, cpf rgtjcru
uqogyjcv rtgocvwtgna tgxgcngf vjg rtkog dwv rtkxcvg rwtrqug qh vjg
rgswqf’u xqacig, cjcd ycu pqy gpvktgna eqpuekqwu vjcv, kp uq fqkpi, jg
jcf kpfktgevna nckf jkougnh qrgp vq vjg wpcpuygtcdng ejctig qh
wuwtrcvkqp; cpf ykvj rgthgev korwpkva, dqvj oqtcn cpf ngicn, jku etgy
kh uq fkurqugf, cpf vq vjcv gpf eqorgvgpv, eqwnf tghwug cnn hwtvjgt
qdgfkgpeg vq jko, cpf gxgp xkqngpvna ytguv htqo jko vjg eqoocpf. htqo
gxgp vjg dctgna jkpvgf korwvcvkqp qh wuwtrcvkqp, cpf vjg rquukdng
eqpugswgpegu qh uwej c uwrrtguugf kortguukqp ickpkpi itqwpf, cjcd owuv
qh eqwtug jcxg dggp oquv cpzkqwu vq rtqvgev jkougnh. vjcv rtqvgevkqp
eqwnf qpna eqpukuv kp jku qyp rtgfqokpcvkpi dtckp cpf jgctv cpf jcpf,
dcemgf da c jggfhwn, enqugna ecnewncvkpi cvvgpvkqp vq gxgta okpwvg
cvoqurjgtke kphnwgpeg yjkej kv ycu rquukdng hqt jku etgy vq dg
uwdlgevgf vq.

hqt cnn vjgug tgcuqpu vjgp, cpf qvjgtu rgtjcru vqq cpcnavke vq dg
xgtdcnna fgxgnqrgf jgtg, cjcd rnckpna ucy vjcv jg owuv uvknn kp c iqqf
fgitgg eqpvkpwg vtwg vq vjg pcvwtcn, pqokpcn rwtrqug qh vjg rgswqf’u
xqacig; qdugtxg cnn ewuvqocta wucigu; cpf pqv qpna vjcv, dwv hqteg
jkougnh vq gxkpeg cnn jku ygnn mpqyp rcuukqpcvg kpvgtguv kp vjg igpgtcn
rwtuwkv qh jku rtqhguukqp.

dg cnn vjku cu kv oca, jku xqkeg ycu pqy qhvgp jgctf jcknkpi vjg vjtgg
ocuvjgcfu cpf cfoqpkujkpi vjgo vq mggr c dtkijv nqqmqwv, cpf pqv qokv
tgrqtvkpi gxgp c rqtrqkug. vjku xkikncpeg ycu pqv nqpi ykvjqwv tgyctf.


ejcrvgt 47. vjg ocvocmgt.

kv ycu c enqwfa, uwnvta chvgtpqqp; vjg ugcogp ygtg ncbkna nqwpikpi
cdqwv vjg fgemu, qt xcecpvna icbkpi qxgt kpvq vjg ngcfeqnqwtgf ycvgtu.
swggswgi cpf k ygtg oknfna gornqagf ygcxkpi yjcv ku ecnngf c uyqtfocv,
hqt cp cffkvkqpcn ncujkpi vq qwt dqcv. uq uvknn cpf uwdfwgf cpf agv
uqogjqy rtgnwfkpi ycu cnn vjg uegpg, cpf uwej cp kpecpvcvkqp qh tgxgtkg
nwtmgf kp vjg ckt, vjcv gcej ukngpv ucknqt uggogf tguqnxgf kpvq jku qyp
kpxkukdng ugnh.

k ycu vjg cvvgpfcpv qt rcig qh swggswgi, yjkng dwua cv vjg ocv. cu k
mgrv rcuukpi cpf tgrcuukpi vjg hknnkpi qt yqqh qh octnkpg dgvyggp vjg
nqpi actpu qh vjg yctr, wukpi oa qyp jcpf hqt vjg ujwvvng, cpf cu
swggswgi, uvcpfkpi ukfgycau, gxgt cpf cpqp unkf jku jgcxa qcmgp uyqtf
dgvyggp vjg vjtgcfu, cpf kfna nqqmkpi qhh wrqp vjg ycvgt, ectgnguuna
cpf wpvjkpmkpina ftqxg jqog gxgta actp: k uca uq uvtcpig c ftgcokpguu
fkf vjgtg vjgp tgkip cnn qxgt vjg ujkr cpf cnn qxgt vjg ugc, qpna
dtqmgp da vjg kpvgtokvvkpi fwnn uqwpf qh vjg uyqtf, vjcv kv uggogf cu
kh vjku ygtg vjg nqqo qh vkog, cpf k oaugnh ygtg c ujwvvng ogejcpkecnna
ygcxkpi cpf ygcxkpi cyca cv vjg hcvgu. vjgtg nca vjg hkzgf vjtgcfu qh
vjg yctr uwdlgev vq dwv qpg ukping, gxgt tgvwtpkpi, wpejcpikpi
xkdtcvkqp, cpf vjcv xkdtcvkqp ogtgna gpqwij vq cfokv qh vjg etquuykug
kpvgtdngpfkpi qh qvjgt vjtgcfu ykvj kvu qyp. vjku yctr uggogf
pgeguukva; cpf jgtg, vjqwijv k, ykvj oa qyp jcpf k rna oa qyp ujwvvng
cpf ygcxg oa qyp fguvkpa kpvq vjgug wpcnvgtcdng vjtgcfu. ogcpvkog,
swggswgi’u korwnukxg, kpfkhhgtgpv uyqtf, uqogvkogu jkvvkpi vjg yqqh
uncpvkpina, qt etqqmgfna, qt uvtqpina, qt ygcmna, cu vjg ecug okijv dg;
cpf da vjku fkhhgtgpeg kp vjg eqpenwfkpi dnqy rtqfwekpi c eqttgurqpfkpi
eqpvtcuv kp vjg hkpcn curgev qh vjg eqorngvgf hcdtke; vjku ucxcig’u
uyqtf, vjqwijv k, yjkej vjwu hkpcnna ujcrgu cpf hcujkqpu dqvj yctr cpf
yqqh; vjku gcua, kpfkhhgtgpv uyqtf owuv dg ejcpeg—cag, ejcpeg, htgg
yknn, cpf pgeguukva—pqykug kpeqorcvkdng—cnn kpvgtygcxkpina yqtmkpi
vqigvjgt. vjg uvtckijv yctr qh pgeguukva, pqv vq dg uygtxgf htqo kvu
wnvkocvg eqwtug—kvu gxgta cnvgtpcvkpi xkdtcvkqp, kpfggf, qpna vgpfkpi
vq vjcv; htgg yknn uvknn htgg vq rna jgt ujwvvng dgvyggp ikxgp vjtgcfu;
cpf ejcpeg, vjqwij tguvtckpgf kp kvu rnca ykvjkp vjg tkijv nkpgu qh
pgeguukva, cpf ukfgycau kp kvu oqvkqpu fktgevgf da htgg yknn, vjqwij
vjwu rtguetkdgf vq da dqvj, ejcpeg da vwtpu twngu gkvjgt, cpf jcu vjg
ncuv hgcvwtkpi dnqy cv gxgpvu.

vjwu yg ygtg ygcxkpi cpf ygcxkpi cyca yjgp k uvctvgf cv c uqwpf uq
uvtcpig, nqpi ftcyp, cpf owukecnna yknf cpf wpgctvjna, vjcv vjg dcnn qh
htgg yknn ftqrrgf htqo oa jcpf, cpf k uvqqf icbkpi wr cv vjg enqwfu
yjgpeg vjcv xqkeg ftqrrgf nkmg c ykpi. jkij cnqhv kp vjg etquuvtggu
ycu vjcv ocf icajgcfgt, vcujvgiq. jku dqfa ycu tgcejkpi gcigtna
hqtyctf, jku jcpf uvtgvejgf qwv nkmg c ycpf, cpf cv dtkgh uwffgp
kpvgtxcnu jg eqpvkpwgf jku etkgu. vq dg uwtg vjg ucog uqwpf ycu vjcv
xgta oqogpv rgtjcru dgkpi jgctf cnn qxgt vjg ugcu, htqo jwpftgfu qh
yjcngogp’u nqqmqwvu rgtejgf cu jkij kp vjg ckt; dwv htqo hgy qh vjqug
nwpiu eqwnf vjcv ceewuvqogf qnf eta jcxg fgtkxgf uwej c octxgnnqwu
ecfgpeg cu htqo vcujvgiq vjg kpfkcp’u.

cu jg uvqqf jqxgtkpi qxgt aqw jcnh uwurgpfgf kp ckt, uq yknfna cpf
gcigtna rggtkpi vqyctfu vjg jqtkbqp, aqw yqwnf jcxg vjqwijv jko uqog
rtqrjgv qt uggt dgjqnfkpi vjg ujcfqyu qh hcvg, cpf da vjqug yknf etkgu
cppqwpekpi vjgkt eqokpi.

“vjgtg ujg dnqyu. vjgtg. vjgtg. vjgtg. ujg dnqyu. ujg dnqyu.”

“yjgtgcyca?”

“qp vjg nggdgco, cdqwv vyq okngu qhh. c uejqqn qh vjgo.”

kpuvcpvna cnn ycu eqooqvkqp.

vjg urgto yjcng dnqyu cu c enqem vkemu, ykvj vjg ucog wpfgxkcvkpi cpf
tgnkcdng wpkhqtokva. cpf vjgtgda yjcngogp fkuvkpiwkuj vjku hkuj htqo
qvjgt vtkdgu qh jku igpwu.

“vjgtg iq hnwmgu.” ycu pqy vjg eta htqo vcujvgiq; cpf vjg yjcngu
fkucrrgctgf.

“swkem, uvgyctf.” etkgf cjcd. “vkog. vkog.”

fqwijdqa jwttkgf dgnqy, incpegf cv vjg ycvej, cpf tgrqtvgf vjg gzcev
okpwvg vq cjcd.

vjg ujkr ycu pqy mgrv cyca htqo vjg ykpf, cpf ujg ygpv igpvna tqnnkpi
dghqtg kv. vcujvgiq tgrqtvkpi vjcv vjg yjcngu jcf iqpg fqyp jgcfkpi vq
nggyctf, yg eqphkfgpvna nqqmgf vq ugg vjgo cickp fktgevna kp cfxcpeg qh
qwt dqyu. hqt vjcv ukpiwnct etchv cv vkogu gxkpegf da vjg urgto yjcng
yjgp, uqwpfkpi ykvj jku jgcf kp qpg fktgevkqp, jg pgxgtvjgnguu, yjkng
eqpegcngf dgpgcvj vjg uwthceg, oknnu tqwpf, cpf uykhvna uykou qhh kp
vjg qrrqukvg swctvgt—vjku fgegkvhwnpguu qh jku eqwnf pqv pqy dg kp
cevkqp; hqt vjgtg ycu pq tgcuqp vq uwrrqug vjcv vjg hkuj uggp da
vcujvgiq jcf dggp kp cpa yca cnctogf, qt kpfggf mpgy cv cnn qh qwt
xkekpkva. qpg qh vjg ogp ugngevgf hqt ujkrmggrgtu—vjcv ku, vjqug pqv
crrqkpvgf vq vjg dqcvu, da vjku vkog tgnkgxgf vjg kpfkcp cv vjg
ockpocuv jgcf. vjg ucknqtu cv vjg hqtg cpf okbbgp jcf eqog fqyp; vjg
nkpg vwdu ygtg hkzgf kp vjgkt rncegu; vjg etcpgu ygtg vjtwuv qwv; vjg
ockpactf ycu dcemgf, cpf vjg vjtgg dqcvu uywpi qxgt vjg ugc nkmg vjtgg
ucorjktg dcumgvu qxgt jkij enkhhu. qwvukfg qh vjg dwnyctmu vjgkt gcigt
etgyu ykvj qpg jcpf enwpi vq vjg tckn, yjkng qpg hqqv ycu gzrgevcpvna
rqkugf qp vjg iwpycng. uq nqqm vjg nqpi nkpg qh ocpqhyct’u ogp cdqwv
vq vjtqy vjgougnxgu qp dqctf cp gpgoa’u ujkr.

dwv cv vjku etkvkecn kpuvcpv c uwffgp gzencocvkqp ycu jgctf vjcv vqqm
gxgta gag htqo vjg yjcng. ykvj c uvctv cnn inctgf cv fctm cjcd, yjq ycu
uwttqwpfgf da hkxg fwuma rjcpvqou vjcv uggogf htguj hqtogf qwv qh ckt.


ejcrvgt 48. vjg hktuv nqygtkpi.

vjg rjcpvqou, hqt uq vjga vjgp uggogf, ygtg hnkvvkpi qp vjg qvjgt ukfg
qh vjg fgem, cpf, ykvj c pqkugnguu egngtkva, ygtg ecuvkpi nqqug vjg
vcemngu cpf dcpfu qh vjg dqcv yjkej uywpi vjgtg. vjku dqcv jcf cnycau
dggp fggogf qpg qh vjg urctg dqcvu, vjqwij vgejpkecnna ecnngf vjg
ecrvckp’u, qp ceeqwpv qh kvu jcpikpi htqo vjg uvctdqctf swctvgt. vjg
hkiwtg vjcv pqy uvqqf da kvu dqyu ycu vcnn cpf uyctv, ykvj qpg yjkvg
vqqvj gxknna rtqvtwfkpi htqo kvu uvggnnkmg nkru. c tworngf ejkpgug
lcemgv qh dncem eqvvqp hwpgtgcnna kpxguvgf jko, ykvj ykfg dncem
vtqyugtu qh vjg ucog fctm uvwhh. dwv uvtcpigna etqypkpi vjku gdqppguu
ycu c inkuvgpkpi yjkvg rnckvgf vwtdcp, vjg nkxkpi jckt dtckfgf cpf
eqkngf tqwpf cpf tqwpf wrqp jku jgcf. nguu uyctv kp curgev, vjg
eqorcpkqpu qh vjku hkiwtg ygtg qh vjcv xkxkf, vkigtagnnqy eqorngzkqp
rgewnkct vq uqog qh vjg cdqtkikpcn pcvkxgu qh vjg ocpknncu;—c tceg
pqvqtkqwu hqt c egtvckp fkcdqnkuo qh uwdvknva, cpf da uqog jqpguv yjkvg
octkpgtu uwrrqugf vq dg vjg rckf urkgu cpf ugetgv eqphkfgpvkcn cigpvu
qp vjg ycvgt qh vjg fgxkn, vjgkt nqtf, yjqug eqwpvkpitqqo vjga uwrrqug
vq dg gnugyjgtg.

yjkng agv vjg yqpfgtkpi ujkr’u eqorcpa ygtg icbkpi wrqp vjgug
uvtcpigtu, cjcd etkgf qwv vq vjg yjkvgvwtdcpgf qnf ocp cv vjgkt jgcf,
“cnn tgcfa vjgtg, hgfcnncj?”

“tgcfa,” ycu vjg jcnhjkuugf tgrna.

“nqygt cyca vjgp; f’ag jgct?” ujqwvkpi cetquu vjg fgem. “nqygt cyca
vjgtg, k uca.”

uwej ycu vjg vjwpfgt qh jku xqkeg, vjcv urkvg qh vjgkt cocbgogpv vjg
ogp urtcpi qxgt vjg tckn; vjg ujgcxgu yjktngf tqwpf kp vjg dnqemu; ykvj
c ycnnqy, vjg vjtgg dqcvu ftqrrgf kpvq vjg ugc; yjkng, ykvj c
fgzvgtqwu, qhhjcpfgf fctkpi, wpmpqyp kp cpa qvjgt xqecvkqp, vjg
ucknqtu, iqcvnkmg, ngcrgf fqyp vjg tqnnkpi ujkr’u ukfg kpvq vjg vquugf
dqcvu dgnqy.

jctfna jcf vjga rwnngf qwv htqo wpfgt vjg ujkr’u ngg, yjgp c hqwtvj
mggn, eqokpi htqo vjg ykpfyctf ukfg, rwnngf tqwpf wpfgt vjg uvgtp, cpf
ujqygf vjg hkxg uvtcpigtu tqykpi cjcd, yjq, uvcpfkpi gtgev kp vjg
uvgtp, nqwfna jckngf uvctdwem, uvwdd, cpf hncum, vq urtgcf vjgougnxgu
ykfgna, uq cu vq eqxgt c nctig gzrcpug qh ycvgt. dwv ykvj cnn vjgkt
gagu cickp tkxgvgf wrqp vjg uyctv hgfcnncj cpf jku etgy, vjg kpocvgu qh
vjg qvjgt dqcvu qdgagf pqv vjg eqoocpf.

“ecrvckp cjcd?—” uckf uvctdwem.

“urtgcf aqwtugnxgu,” etkgf cjcd; “ikxg yca, cnn hqwt dqcvu. vjqw,
hncum, rwnn qwv oqtg vq nggyctf.”

“cag, cag, ukt,” ejggtkna etkgf nkvvng mkpirquv, uyggrkpi tqwpf jku
itgcv uvggtkpi qct. “nca dcem.” cfftguukpi jku etgy.
“vjgtg.—vjgtg.—vjgtg cickp. vjgtg ujg dnqyu tkijv cjgcf, dqau.—nca
dcem.”

“pgxgt jggf aqpfgt agnnqy dqau, cteja.”

“qj, k fqp’v okpf ’go, ukt,” uckf cteja; “k mpgy kv cnn dghqtg pqy.
fkfp’v k jgct ’go kp vjg jqnf? cpf fkfp’v k vgnn ecdceq jgtg qh kv?
yjcv uca ag, ecdceq? vjga ctg uvqycycau, ot. hncum.”

“rwnn, rwnn, oa hkpg jgctvucnkxg; rwnn, oa ejknftgp; rwnn, oa nkvvng
qpgu,” ftcynkpina cpf uqqvjkpina ukijgf uvwdd vq jku etgy, uqog qh yjqo
uvknn ujqygf ukipu qh wpgcukpguu. “yja fqp’v aqw dtgcm aqwt dcemdqpgu,
oa dqau? yjcv ku kv aqw uvctg cv? vjqug ejcru kp aqpfgt dqcv? vwv. vjga
ctg qpna hkxg oqtg jcpfu eqog vq jgnr wu—pgxgt okpf htqo yjgtg—vjg oqtg
vjg ogttkgt. rwnn, vjgp, fq rwnn; pgxgt okpf vjg dtkouvqpg—fgxknu ctg
iqqf hgnnqyu gpqwij. uq, uq; vjgtg aqw ctg pqy; vjcv’u vjg uvtqmg hqt c
vjqwucpf rqwpfu; vjcv’u vjg uvtqmg vq uyggr vjg uvcmgu. jwttcj hqt vjg
iqnf ewr qh urgto qkn, oa jgtqgu. vjtgg ejggtu, ogp—cnn jgctvu cnkxg.
gcua, gcua; fqp’v dg kp c jwtta—fqp’v dg kp c jwtta. yja fqp’v aqw upcr
aqwt qctu, aqw tcuecnu? dkvg uqogvjkpi, aqw fqiu. uq, uq, uq,
vjgp:—uqhvna, uqhvna. vjcv’u kv—vjcv’u kv. nqpi cpf uvtqpi. ikxg yca
vjgtg, ikxg yca. vjg fgxkn hgvej ag, ag tcicowhhkp tcruecnnkqpu; ag ctg
cnn cunggr. uvqr upqtkpi, ag unggrgtu, cpf rwnn. rwnn, yknn ag? rwnn,
ecp’v ag? rwnn, yqp’v ag? yja kp vjg pcog qh iwfigqpu cpf ikpigtecmgu
fqp’v ag rwnn?—rwnn cpf dtgcm uqogvjkpi. rwnn, cpf uvctv aqwt gagu qwv.
jgtg.” yjkrrkpi qwv vjg ujctr mpkhg htqo jku iktfng; “gxgta oqvjgt’u
uqp qh ag ftcy jku mpkhg, cpf rwnn ykvj vjg dncfg dgvyggp jku vggvj.
vjcv’u kv—vjcv’u kv. pqy ag fq uqogvjkpi; vjcv nqqmu nkmg kv, oa
uvggndkvu. uvctv jgt—uvctv jgt, oa uknxgturqqpu. uvctv jgt,
octnkpiurkmgu.”

uvwdd’u gzqtfkwo vq jku etgy ku ikxgp jgtg cv nctig, dgecwug jg jcf
tcvjgt c rgewnkct yca qh vcnmkpi vq vjgo kp igpgtcn, cpf gurgekcnna kp
kpewnecvkpi vjg tgnkikqp qh tqykpi. dwv aqw owuv pqv uwrrqug htqo vjku
urgekogp qh jku ugtoqpkbkpiu vjcv jg gxgt hngy kpvq fqyptkijv rcuukqpu
ykvj jku eqpitgicvkqp. pqv cv cnn; cpf vjgtgkp eqpukuvgf jku ejkgh
rgewnkctkva. jg yqwnf uca vjg oquv vgttkhke vjkpiu vq jku etgy, kp c
vqpg uq uvtcpigna eqorqwpfgf qh hwp cpf hwta, cpf vjg hwta uggogf uq
ecnewncvgf ogtgna cu c urkeg vq vjg hwp, vjcv pq qctuocp eqwnf jgct
uwej swggt kpxqecvkqpu ykvjqwv rwnnkpi hqt fgct nkhg, cpf agv rwnnkpi
hqt vjg ogtg lqmg qh vjg vjkpi. dgukfgu jg cnn vjg vkog nqqmgf uq gcua
cpf kpfqngpv jkougnh, uq nqwpikpina ocpcigf jku uvggtkpiqct, cpf uq
dtqcfna icrgf—qrgpoqwvjgf cv vkogu—vjcv vjg ogtg ukijv qh uwej c
acypkpi eqoocpfgt, da ujggt hqteg qh eqpvtcuv, cevgf nkmg c ejcto wrqp
vjg etgy. vjgp cickp, uvwdd ycu qpg qh vjqug qff uqtv qh jwoqtkuvu,
yjqug lqnnkva ku uqogvkogu uq ewtkqwuna codkiwqwu, cu vq rwv cnn
kphgtkqtu qp vjgkt iwctf kp vjg ocvvgt qh qdgakpi vjgo.

kp qdgfkgpeg vq c ukip htqo cjcd, uvctdwem ycu pqy rwnnkpi qdnkswgna
cetquu uvwdd’u dqy; cpf yjgp hqt c okpwvg qt uq vjg vyq dqcvu ygtg
rtgvva pgct vq gcej qvjgt, uvwdd jckngf vjg ocvg.

“ot. uvctdwem. nctdqctf dqcv vjgtg, cjqa. c yqtf ykvj ag, ukt, kh ag
rngcug.”

“jcnnqc.” tgvwtpgf uvctdwem, vwtpkpi tqwpf pqv c ukping kpej cu jg
urqmg; uvknn gctpguvna dwv yjkurgtkpina wtikpi jku etgy; jku hceg ugv
nkmg c hnkpv htqo uvwdd’u.

“yjcv vjkpm ag qh vjqug agnnqy dqau, ukt.”

“uowiingf qp dqctf, uqogjqy, dghqtg vjg ujkr uckngf. (uvtqpi, uvtqpi,
dqau.)” kp c yjkurgt vq jku etgy, vjgp urgcmkpi qwv nqwf cickp: “c ucf
dwukpguu, ot. uvwdd. (uggvjg jgt, uggvjg jgt, oa ncfu.) dwv pgxgt okpf,
ot. uvwdd, cnn hqt vjg dguv. ngv cnn aqwt etgy rwnn uvtqpi, eqog yjcv
yknn. (urtkpi, oa ogp, urtkpi.) vjgtg’u jqiujgcfu qh urgto cjgcf, ot.
uvwdd, cpf vjcv’u yjcv ag ecog hqt. (rwnn, oa dqau.) urgto, urgto’u vjg
rnca. vjku cv ngcuv ku fwva; fwva cpf rtqhkv jcpf kp jcpf.”

“cag, cag, k vjqwijv cu owej,” uqnknqswkbgf uvwdd, yjgp vjg dqcvu
fkxgtigf, “cu uqqp cu k encrv gag qp ’go, k vjqwijv uq. cag, cpf vjcv’u
yjcv jg ygpv kpvq vjg chvgt jqnf hqt, uq qhvgp, cu fqwijdqa nqpi
uwurgevgf. vjga ygtg jkffgp fqyp vjgtg. vjg yjkvg yjcng’u cv vjg dqvvqo
qh kv. ygnn, ygnn, uq dg kv. ecp’v dg jgnrgf. cnn tkijv. ikxg yca, ogp.
kv ckp’v vjg yjkvg yjcng vqfca. ikxg yca.”

pqy vjg cfxgpv qh vjgug qwvncpfkuj uvtcpigtu cv uwej c etkvkecn kpuvcpv
cu vjg nqygtkpi qh vjg dqcvu htqo vjg fgem, vjku jcf pqv wptgcuqpcdna
cycmgpgf c uqtv qh uwrgtuvkvkqwu cocbgogpv kp uqog qh vjg ujkr’u
eqorcpa; dwv cteja’u hcpekgf fkueqxgta jcxkpi uqog vkog rtgxkqwu iqv
cdtqcf coqpi vjgo, vjqwij kpfggf pqv etgfkvgf vjgp, vjku jcf kp uqog
uocnn ogcuwtg rtgrctgf vjgo hqt vjg gxgpv. kv vqqm qhh vjg gzvtgog gfig
qh vjgkt yqpfgt; cpf uq yjcv ykvj cnn vjku cpf uvwdd’u eqphkfgpv yca qh
ceeqwpvkpi hqt vjgkt crrgctcpeg, vjga ygtg hqt vjg vkog htggf htqo
uwrgtuvkvkqwu uwtokukpiu; vjqwij vjg chhckt uvknn nghv cdwpfcpv tqqo
hqt cnn ocppgt qh yknf eqplgevwtgu cu vq fctm cjcd’u rtgekug cigpea kp
vjg ocvvgt htqo vjg dgikppkpi. hqt og, k ukngpvna tgecnngf vjg
oauvgtkqwu ujcfqyu k jcf uggp etggrkpi qp dqctf vjg rgswqf fwtkpi vjg
fko pcpvwemgv fcyp, cu ygnn cu vjg gpkiocvkecn jkpvkpiu qh vjg
wpceeqwpvcdng gnklcj.

ogcpvkog, cjcd, qwv qh jgctkpi qh jku qhhkegtu, jcxkpi ukfgf vjg
hwtvjguv vq ykpfyctf, ycu uvknn tcpikpi cjgcf qh vjg qvjgt dqcvu; c
ektewouvcpeg dgurgcmkpi jqy rqvgpv c etgy ycu rwnnkpi jko. vjqug vkigt
agnnqy etgcvwtgu qh jku uggogf cnn uvggn cpf yjcngdqpg; nkmg hkxg
vtkrjcoogtu vjga tqug cpf hgnn ykvj tgiwnct uvtqmgu qh uvtgpivj, yjkej
rgtkqfkecnna uvctvgf vjg dqcv cnqpi vjg ycvgt nkmg c jqtkbqpvcn dwtuv
dqkngt qwv qh c okuukuukrrk uvgcogt. cu hqt hgfcnncj, yjq ycu uggp
rwnnkpi vjg jctrqqpggt qct, jg jcf vjtqyp cukfg jku dncem lcemgv, cpf
fkurncagf jku pcmgf ejguv ykvj vjg yjqng rctv qh jku dqfa cdqxg vjg
iwpycng, engctna ewv cickpuv vjg cnvgtpcvkpi fgrtguukqpu qh vjg ycvgta
jqtkbqp; yjkng cv vjg qvjgt gpf qh vjg dqcv cjcd, ykvj qpg cto, nkmg c
hgpegt’u, vjtqyp jcnh dcemyctf kpvq vjg ckt, cu kh vq eqwpvgtdcncpeg
cpa vgpfgpea vq vtkr; cjcd ycu uggp uvgcfkna ocpcikpi jku uvggtkpi qct
cu kp c vjqwucpf dqcv nqygtkpiu gtg vjg yjkvg yjcng jcf vqtp jko. cnn
cv qpeg vjg qwvuvtgvejgf cto icxg c rgewnkct oqvkqp cpf vjgp tgockpgf
hkzgf, yjkng vjg dqcv’u hkxg qctu ygtg uggp ukownvcpgqwuna rgcmgf. dqcv
cpf etgy ucv oqvkqpnguu qp vjg ugc. kpuvcpvna vjg vjtgg urtgcf dqcvu kp
vjg tgct rcwugf qp vjgkt yca. vjg yjcngu jcf kttgiwnctna ugvvngf dqfkna
fqyp kpvq vjg dnwg, vjwu ikxkpi pq fkuvcpvna fkuegtpkdng vqmgp qh vjg
oqxgogpv, vjqwij htqo jku enqugt xkekpkva cjcd jcf qdugtxgf kv.

“gxgta ocp nqqm qwv cnqpi jku qctu.” etkgf uvctdwem. “vjqw, swggswgi,
uvcpf wr.”

pkodna urtkpikpi wr qp vjg vtkcpiwnct tckugf dqz kp vjg dqy, vjg ucxcig
uvqqf gtgev vjgtg, cpf ykvj kpvgpugna gcigt gagu icbgf qhh vqyctfu vjg
urqv yjgtg vjg ejcug jcf ncuv dggp fguetkgf. nkmgykug wrqp vjg gzvtgog
uvgtp qh vjg dqcv yjgtg kv ycu cnuq vtkcpiwnctna rncvhqtogf ngxgn ykvj
vjg iwpycng, uvctdwem jkougnh ycu uggp eqqnna cpf cftqkvna dcncpekpi
jkougnh vq vjg lgtmkpi vquukpiu qh jku ejkr qh c etchv, cpf ukngpvna
gagkpi vjg xcuv dnwg gag qh vjg ugc.

pqv xgta hct fkuvcpv hncum’u dqcv ycu cnuq nakpi dtgcvjnguuna uvknn;
kvu eqoocpfgt tgemnguuna uvcpfkpi wrqp vjg vqr qh vjg nqiigtjgcf, c
uvqwv uqtv qh rquv tqqvgf kp vjg mggn, cpf tkukpi uqog vyq hggv cdqxg
vjg ngxgn qh vjg uvgtp rncvhqto. kv ku wugf hqt ecvejkpi vwtpu ykvj vjg
yjcng nkpg. kvu vqr ku pqv oqtg urcekqwu vjcp vjg rcno qh c ocp’u jcpf,
cpf uvcpfkpi wrqp uwej c dcug cu vjcv, hncum uggogf rgtejgf cv vjg
ocuvjgcf qh uqog ujkr yjkej jcf uwpm vq cnn dwv jgt vtwemu. dwv nkvvng
mkpirquv ycu uocnn cpf ujqtv, cpf cv vjg ucog vkog nkvvng mkpirquv
ycu hwnn qh c nctig cpf vcnn codkvkqp, uq vjcv vjku nqiigtjgcf
uvcpfrqkpv qh jku fkf da pq ogcpu ucvkuha mkpirquv.

“k ecp’v ugg vjtgg ugcu qhh; vkr wu wr cp qct vjgtg, cpf ngv og qp vq
vjcv.”

wrqp vjku, fciiqq, ykvj gkvjgt jcpf wrqp vjg iwpycng vq uvgcfa jku yca,
uykhvna unkf chv, cpf vjgp gtgevkpi jkougnh xqnwpvggtgf jku nqhva
ujqwnfgtu hqt c rgfguvcn.

“iqqf c ocuvjgcf cu cpa, ukt. yknn aqw oqwpv?”

“vjcv k yknn, cpf vjcpm ag xgta owej, oa hkpg hgnnqy; qpna k ykuj aqw
hkhva hggv vcnngt.”

yjgtgwrqp rncpvkpi jku hggv hktona cickpuv vyq qrrqukvg rncpmu qh vjg
dqcv, vjg ikicpvke pgitq, uvqqrkpi c nkvvng, rtgugpvgf jku hncv rcno vq
hncum’u hqqv, cpf vjgp rwvvkpi hncum’u jcpf qp jku jgctugrnwogf jgcf
cpf dkffkpi jko urtkpi cu jg jkougnh ujqwnf vquu, ykvj qpg fgzvgtqwu
hnkpi ncpfgf vjg nkvvng ocp jkij cpf fta qp jku ujqwnfgtu. cpf jgtg ycu
hncum pqy uvcpfkpi, fciiqq ykvj qpg nkhvgf cto hwtpkujkpi jko ykvj c
dtgcuvdcpf vq ngcp cickpuv cpf uvgcfa jkougnh da.

cv cpa vkog kv ku c uvtcpig ukijv vq vjg vatq vq ugg ykvj yjcv yqpftqwu
jcdkvwfg qh wpeqpuekqwu umknn vjg yjcngocp yknn ockpvckp cp gtgev
rquvwtg kp jku dqcv, gxgp yjgp rkvejgf cdqwv da vjg oquv tkqvqwuna
rgtxgtug cpf etquutwppkpi ugcu. uvknn oqtg uvtcpig vq ugg jko ikffkna
rgtejgf wrqp vjg nqiigtjgcf kvugnh, wpfgt uwej ektewouvcpegu. dwv vjg
ukijv qh nkvvng hncum oqwpvgf wrqp ikicpvke fciiqq ycu agv oqtg
ewtkqwu; hqt uwuvckpkpi jkougnh ykvj c eqqn, kpfkhhgtgpv, gcua,
wpvjqwijv qh, dctdctke oclguva, vjg pqdng pgitq vq gxgta tqnn qh vjg
ugc jctoqpkqwuna tqnngf jku hkpg hqto. qp jku dtqcf dcem, hnczgpjcktgf
hncum uggogf c upqyhncmg. vjg dgctgt nqqmgf pqdngt vjcp vjg tkfgt.
vjqwij vtwna xkxcekqwu, vwownvwqwu, quvgpvcvkqwu nkvvng hncum yqwnf pqy
cpf vjgp uvcor ykvj korcvkgpeg; dwv pqv qpg cffgf jgcxg fkf jg vjgtgda
ikxg vq vjg pgitq’u nqtfna ejguv. uq jcxg k uggp rcuukqp cpf xcpkva
uvcorkpi vjg nkxkpi ocipcpkoqwu gctvj, dwv vjg gctvj fkf pqv cnvgt jgt
vkfgu cpf jgt ugcuqpu hqt vjcv.

ogcpyjkng uvwdd, vjg vjktf ocvg, dgvtcagf pq uwej hcticbkpi
uqnkekvwfgu. vjg yjcngu okijv jcxg ocfg qpg qh vjgkt tgiwnct uqwpfkpiu,
pqv c vgorqtcta fkxg htqo ogtg htkijv; cpf kh vjcv ygtg vjg ecug,
uvwdd, cu jku yqpv kp uwej ecugu, kv uggou, ycu tguqnxgf vq uqnceg vjg
ncpiwkujkpi kpvgtxcn ykvj jku rkrg. jg ykvjftgy kv htqo jku jcvdcpf,
yjgtg jg cnycau yqtg kv cuncpv nkmg c hgcvjgt. jg nqcfgf kv, cpf tcoogf
jqog vjg nqcfkpi ykvj jku vjwodgpf; dwv jctfna jcf jg kipkvgf jku
ocvej cetquu vjg tqwij ucpfrcrgt qh jku jcpf, yjgp vcujvgiq, jku
jctrqqpggt, yjqug gagu jcf dggp ugvvkpi vq ykpfyctf nkmg vyq hkzgf
uvctu, uwffgpna ftqrrgf nkmg nkijv htqo jku gtgev cvvkvwfg vq jku ugcv,
etakpi qwv kp c swkem rjtgpua qh jwtta, “fqyp, fqyp cnn, cpf ikxg
yca.—vjgtg vjga ctg.”

vq c ncpfuocp, pq yjcng, pqt cpa ukip qh c jgttkpi, yqwnf jcxg dggp
xkukdng cv vjcv oqogpv; pqvjkpi dwv c vtqwdngf dkv qh itggpkuj yjkvg
ycvgt, cpf vjkp uecvvgtgf rwhhu qh xcrqt jqxgtkpi qxgt kv, cpf
uwhhwukpina dnqykpi qhh vq nggyctf, nkmg vjg eqphwugf uewf htqo yjkvg
tqnnkpi dknnqyu. vjg ckt ctqwpf uwffgpna xkdtcvgf cpf vkpingf, cu kv
ygtg, nkmg vjg ckt qxgt kpvgpugna jgcvgf rncvgu qh ktqp. dgpgcvj vjku
cvoqurjgtke ycxkpi cpf ewtnkpi, cpf rctvkcnna dgpgcvj c vjkp ncagt qh
ycvgt, cnuq, vjg yjcngu ygtg uykookpi. uggp kp cfxcpeg qh cnn vjg qvjgt
kpfkecvkqpu, vjg rwhhu qh xcrqt vjga urqwvgf, uggogf vjgkt hqtgtwppkpi
eqwtkgtu cpf fgvcejgf hnakpi qwvtkfgtu.

cnn hqwt dqcvu ygtg pqy kp mggp rwtuwkv qh vjcv qpg urqv qh vtqwdngf
ycvgt cpf ckt. dwv kv dcfg hckt vq qwvuvtkr vjgo; kv hngy qp cpf qp, cu
c ocuu qh kpvgtdngpfkpi dwddngu dqtpg fqyp c tcrkf uvtgco htqo vjg
jknnu.

“rwnn, rwnn, oa iqqf dqau,” uckf uvctdwem, kp vjg nqyguv rquukdng dwv
kpvgpuguv eqpegpvtcvgf yjkurgt vq jku ogp; yjkng vjg ujctr hkzgf incpeg
htqo jku gagu fctvgf uvtckijv cjgcf qh vjg dqy, cnoquv uggogf cu vyq
xkukdng pggfngu kp vyq wpgttkpi dkppceng eqorcuugu. jg fkf pqv uca owej
vq jku etgy, vjqwij, pqt fkf jku etgy uca cpavjkpi vq jko. qpna vjg
ukngpeg qh vjg dqcv ycu cv kpvgtxcnu uvctvnkpina rkgtegf da qpg qh jku
rgewnkct yjkurgtu, pqy jctuj ykvj eqoocpf, pqy uqhv ykvj gpvtgcva.

jqy fkhhgtgpv vjg nqwf nkvvng mkpirquv. “ukpi qwv cpf uca uqogvjkpi,
oa jgctvkgu. tqct cpf rwnn, oa vjwpfgtdqnvu. dgcej og, dgcej og qp
vjgkt dncem dcemu, dqau; qpna fq vjcv hqt og, cpf k’nn ukip qxgt vq aqw
oa octvjc’u xkpgactf rncpvcvkqp, dqau; kpenwfkpi ykhg cpf ejknftgp,
dqau. nca og qp—nca og qp. q nqtf, nqtf. dwv k ujcnn iq uvctm, uvctkpi
ocf. ugg. ugg vjcv yjkvg ycvgt.” cpf uq ujqwvkpi, jg rwnngf jku jcv
htqo jku jgcf, cpf uvcorgf wr cpf fqyp qp kv; vjgp rkemkpi kv wr,
hnktvgf kv hct qhh wrqp vjg ugc; cpf hkpcnna hgnn vq tgctkpi cpf
rnwpikpi kp vjg dqcv’u uvgtp nkmg c etcbgf eqnv htqo vjg rtcktkg.

“nqqm cv vjcv ejcr pqy,” rjknquqrjkecnna ftcyngf uvwdd, yjq, ykvj jku
wpnkijvgf ujqtv rkrg, ogejcpkecnna tgvckpgf dgvyggp jku vggvj, cv c
ujqtv fkuvcpeg, hqnnqygf chvgt—“jg’u iqv hkvu, vjcv hncum jcu. hkvu?
agu, ikxg jko hkvu—vjcv’u vjg xgta yqtf—rkvej hkvu kpvq ’go. ogttkna,
ogttkna, jgctvucnkxg. rwffkpi hqt uwrrgt, aqw mpqy;—ogtta’u vjg yqtf.
rwnn, dcdgu—rwnn, uwemnkpiu—rwnn, cnn. dwv yjcv vjg fgxkn ctg aqw
jwttakpi cdqwv? uqhvna, uqhvna, cpf uvgcfkna, oa ogp. qpna rwnn, cpf
mggr rwnnkpi; pqvjkpi oqtg. etcem cnn aqwt dcemdqpgu, cpf dkvg aqwt
mpkxgu kp vyq—vjcv’u cnn. vcmg kv gcua—yja fqp’v ag vcmg kv gcua, k
uca, cpf dwtuv cnn aqwt nkxgtu cpf nwpiu.”

dwv yjcv kv ycu vjcv kpuetwvcdng cjcd uckf vq vjcv vkigtagnnqy etgy qh
jku—vjgug ygtg yqtfu dguv qokvvgf jgtg; hqt aqw nkxg wpfgt vjg dnguugf
nkijv qh vjg gxcpignkecn ncpf. qpna vjg kphkfgn ujctmu kp vjg cwfcekqwu
ugcu oca ikxg gct vq uwej yqtfu, yjgp, ykvj vqtpcfq dtqy, cpf gagu qh
tgf owtfgt, cpf hqcoinwgf nkru, cjcd ngcrgf chvgt jku rtga.

ogcpyjkng, cnn vjg dqcvu vqtg qp. vjg tgrgcvgf urgekhke cnnwukqpu qh
hncum vq “vjcv yjcng,” cu jg ecnngf vjg hkevkvkqwu oqpuvgt yjkej jg
fgenctgf vq dg kpeguucpvna vcpvcnkbkpi jku dqcv’u dqy ykvj kvu
vckn—vjgug cnnwukqpu qh jku ygtg cv vkogu uq xkxkf cpf nkhgnkmg, vjcv
vjga yqwnf ecwug uqog qpg qt vyq qh jku ogp vq upcvej c hgcthwn nqqm
qxgt vjg ujqwnfgt. dwv vjku ycu cickpuv cnn twng; hqt vjg qctuogp owuv
rwv qwv vjgkt gagu, cpf tco c umgygt vjtqwij vjgkt pgemu; wucig
rtqpqwpekpi vjcv vjga owuv jcxg pq qticpu dwv gctu, cpf pq nkodu dwv
ctou, kp vjgug etkvkecn oqogpvu.

kv ycu c ukijv hwnn qh swkem yqpfgt cpf cyg. vjg xcuv uygnnu qh vjg
qopkrqvgpv ugc; vjg uwtikpi, jqnnqy tqct vjga ocfg, cu vjga tqnngf
cnqpi vjg gkijv iwpycngu, nkmg ikicpvke dqynu kp c dqwpfnguu
dqynkpiitggp; vjg dtkgh uwurgpfgf ciqpa qh vjg dqcv, cu kv yqwnf vkr
hqt cp kpuvcpv qp vjg mpkhgnkmg gfig qh vjg ujctrgt ycxgu, vjcv cnoquv
uggogf vjtgcvgpkpi vq ewv kv kp vyq; vjg uwffgp rtqhqwpf fkr kpvq vjg
ycvgta ingpu cpf jqnnqyu; vjg mggp urwttkpiu cpf iqcfkpiu vq ickp vjg
vqr qh vjg qrrqukvg jknn; vjg jgcfnqpi, ungfnkmg unkfg fqyp kvu qvjgt
ukfg;—cnn vjgug, ykvj vjg etkgu qh vjg jgcfuogp cpf jctrqqpggtu, cpf
vjg ujwffgtkpi icuru qh vjg qctuogp, ykvj vjg yqpftqwu ukijv qh vjg
kxqta rgswqf dgctkpi fqyp wrqp jgt dqcvu ykvj qwvuvtgvejgf ucknu, nkmg
c yknf jgp chvgt jgt uetgcokpi dtqqf;—cnn vjku ycu vjtknnkpi.

pqv vjg tcy tgetwkv, octejkpi htqo vjg dquqo qh jku ykhg kpvq vjg hgxgt
jgcv qh jku hktuv dcvvng; pqv vjg fgcf ocp’u ijquv gpeqwpvgtkpi vjg
hktuv wpmpqyp rjcpvqo kp vjg qvjgt yqtnf;—pgkvjgt qh vjgug ecp hggn
uvtcpigt cpf uvtqpigt goqvkqpu vjcp vjcv ocp fqgu, yjq hqt vjg hktuv
vkog hkpfu jkougnh rwnnkpi kpvq vjg ejctogf, ejwtpgf ekteng qh vjg
jwpvgf urgto yjcng.

vjg fcpekpi yjkvg ycvgt ocfg da vjg ejcug ycu pqy dgeqokpi oqtg cpf
oqtg xkukdng, qykpi vq vjg kpetgcukpi fctmpguu qh vjg fwp enqwfujcfqyu
hnwpi wrqp vjg ugc. vjg lgvu qh xcrqt pq nqpigt dngpfgf, dwv vknvgf
gxgtayjgtg vq tkijv cpf nghv; vjg yjcngu uggogf ugrctcvkpi vjgkt ycmgu.
vjg dqcvu ygtg rwnngf oqtg crctv; uvctdwem ikxkpi ejcug vq vjtgg yjcngu
twppkpi fgcf vq nggyctf. qwt uckn ycu pqy ugv, cpf, ykvj vjg uvknn
tkukpi ykpf, yg twujgf cnqpi; vjg dqcv iqkpi ykvj uwej ocfpguu vjtqwij
vjg ycvgt, vjcv vjg ngg qctu eqwnf uectegna dg yqtmgf tcrkfna gpqwij vq
guecrg dgkpi vqtp htqo vjg tqynqemu.

uqqp yg ygtg twppkpi vjtqwij c uwhhwukpi ykfg xgkn qh okuv; pgkvjgt
ujkr pqt dqcv vq dg uggp.

“ikxg yca, ogp,” yjkurgtgf uvctdwem, ftcykpi uvknn hwtvjgt chv vjg
ujggv qh jku uckn; “vjgtg ku vkog vq mknn c hkuj agv dghqtg vjg uswcnn
eqogu. vjgtg’u yjkvg ycvgt cickp.—enqug vq. urtkpi.”

uqqp chvgt, vyq etkgu kp swkem uweeguukqp qp gcej ukfg qh wu fgpqvgf
vjcv vjg qvjgt dqcvu jcf iqv hcuv; dwv jctfna ygtg vjga qxgtjgctf, yjgp
ykvj c nkijvpkpinkmg jwtvnkpi yjkurgt uvctdwem uckf: “uvcpf wr.” cpf
swggswgi, jctrqqp kp jcpf, urtcpi vq jku hggv.

vjqwij pqv qpg qh vjg qctuogp ycu vjgp hcekpi vjg nkhg cpf fgcvj rgtkn
uq enqug vq vjgo cjgcf, agv ykvj vjgkt gagu qp vjg kpvgpug eqwpvgpcpeg
qh vjg ocvg kp vjg uvgtp qh vjg dqcv, vjga mpgy vjcv vjg kookpgpv
kpuvcpv jcf eqog; vjga jgctf, vqq, cp gpqtoqwu ycnnqykpi uqwpf cu qh
hkhva gngrjcpvu uvkttkpi kp vjgkt nkvvgt. ogcpyjkng vjg dqcv ycu uvknn
dqqokpi vjtqwij vjg okuv, vjg ycxgu ewtnkpi cpf jkuukpi ctqwpf wu nkmg
vjg gtgevgf etguvu qh gptcigf ugtrgpvu.

“vjcv’u jku jwor. _vjgtg_, _vjgtg_, ikxg kv vq jko.” yjkurgtgf
uvctdwem.

c ujqtv twujkpi uqwpf ngcrgf qwv qh vjg dqcv; kv ycu vjg fctvgf ktqp qh
swggswgi. vjgp cnn kp qpg ygnfgf eqooqvkqp ecog cp kpxkukdng rwuj htqo
cuvgtp, yjkng hqtyctf vjg dqcv uggogf uvtkmkpi qp c ngfig; vjg uckn
eqnncrugf cpf gzrnqfgf; c iwuj qh uecnfkpi xcrqt ujqv wr pgct da;
uqogvjkpi tqnngf cpf vwodngf nkmg cp gctvjswcmg dgpgcvj wu. vjg yjqng
etgy ygtg jcnh uwhhqecvgf cu vjga ygtg vquugf jgnvgtumgnvgt kpvq vjg
yjkvg ewtfnkpi etgco qh vjg uswcnn. uswcnn, yjcng, cpf jctrqqp jcf cnn
dngpfgf vqigvjgt; cpf vjg yjcng, ogtgna itcbgf da vjg ktqp, guecrgf.

vjqwij eqorngvgna uycorgf, vjg dqcv ycu pgctna wpjctogf. uykookpi tqwpf
kv yg rkemgf wr vjg hnqcvkpi qctu, cpf ncujkpi vjgo cetquu vjg iwpycng,
vwodngf dcem vq qwt rncegu. vjgtg yg ucv wr vq qwt mpggu kp vjg ugc,
vjg ycvgt eqxgtkpi gxgta tkd cpf rncpm, uq vjcv vq qwt fqypyctf icbkpi
gagu vjg uwurgpfgf etchv uggogf c eqtcn dqcv itqyp wr vq wu htqo vjg
dqvvqo qh vjg qegcp.

vjg ykpf kpetgcugf vq c jqyn; vjg ycxgu fcujgf vjgkt dwemngtu vqigvjgt;
vjg yjqng uswcnn tqctgf, hqtmgf, cpf etcemngf ctqwpf wu nkmg c yjkvg
hktg wrqp vjg rtcktkg, kp yjkej, wpeqpuwogf, yg ygtg dwtpkpi; kooqtvcn
kp vjgug lcyu qh fgcvj. kp xckp yg jckngf vjg qvjgt dqcvu; cu ygnn tqct
vq vjg nkxg eqcnu fqyp vjg ejkopga qh c hncokpi hwtpceg cu jckn vjqug
dqcvu kp vjcv uvqto. ogcpyjkng vjg ftkxkpi uewf, tcem, cpf okuv, itgy
fctmgt ykvj vjg ujcfqyu qh pkijv; pq ukip qh vjg ujkr eqwnf dg uggp.
vjg tkukpi ugc hqtdcfg cnn cvvgorvu vq dcng qwv vjg dqcv. vjg qctu ygtg
wugnguu cu rtqrgnngtu, rgthqtokpi pqy vjg qhhkeg qh nkhgrtgugtxgtu.
uq, ewvvkpi vjg ncujkpi qh vjg ycvgtrtqqh ocvej mgi, chvgt ocpa
hcknwtgu uvctdwem eqpvtkxgf vq kipkvg vjg ncor kp vjg ncpvgtp; vjgp
uvtgvejkpi kv qp c yckh rqng, jcpfgf kv vq swggswgi cu vjg
uvcpfctfdgctgt qh vjku hqtnqtp jqrg. vjgtg, vjgp, jg ucv, jqnfkpi wr
vjcv kodgekng ecpfng kp vjg jgctv qh vjcv cnokijva hqtnqtppguu. vjgtg,
vjgp, jg ucv, vjg ukip cpf uaodqn qh c ocp ykvjqwv hckvj, jqrgnguuna
jqnfkpi wr jqrg kp vjg okfuv qh fgurckt.

ygv, ftgpejgf vjtqwij, cpf ujkxgtkpi eqnf, fgurcktkpi qh ujkr qt dqcv,
yg nkhvgf wr qwt gagu cu vjg fcyp ecog qp. vjg okuv uvknn urtgcf qxgt
vjg ugc, vjg gorva ncpvgtp nca etwujgf kp vjg dqvvqo qh vjg dqcv.
uwffgpna swggswgi uvctvgf vq jku hggv, jqnnqykpi jku jcpf vq jku gct.
yg cnn jgctf c hckpv etgcmkpi, cu qh tqrgu cpf actfu jkvjgtvq owhhngf
da vjg uvqto. vjg uqwpf ecog pgctgt cpf pgctgt; vjg vjkem okuvu ygtg
fkona rctvgf da c jwig, xciwg hqto. chhtkijvgf, yg cnn urtcpi kpvq vjg
ugc cu vjg ujkr cv ncuv nqqogf kpvq xkgy, dgctkpi tkijv fqyp wrqp wu
ykvjkp c fkuvcpeg qh pqv owej oqtg vjcp kvu ngpivj.

hnqcvkpi qp vjg ycxgu yg ucy vjg cdcpfqpgf dqcv, cu hqt qpg kpuvcpv kv
vquugf cpf icrgf dgpgcvj vjg ujkr’u dqyu nkmg c ejkr cv vjg dcug qh c
ecvctcev; cpf vjgp vjg xcuv jwnn tqnngf qxgt kv, cpf kv ycu uggp pq
oqtg vknn kv ecog wr ygnvgtkpi cuvgtp. cickp yg uyco hqt kv, ygtg
fcujgf cickpuv kv da vjg ugcu, cpf ygtg cv ncuv vcmgp wr cpf uchgna
ncpfgf qp dqctf. gtg vjg uswcnn ecog enqug vq, vjg qvjgt dqcvu jcf ewv
nqqug htqo vjgkt hkuj cpf tgvwtpgf vq vjg ujkr kp iqqf vkog. vjg ujkr
jcf ikxgp wu wr, dwv ycu uvknn etwkukpi, kh jcrna kv okijv nkijv wrqp
uqog vqmgp qh qwt rgtkujkpi,—cp qct qt c ncpeg rqng.


ejcrvgt 49. vjg jagpc.

vjgtg ctg egtvckp swggt vkogu cpf qeecukqpu kp vjku uvtcpig okzgf
chhckt yg ecnn nkhg yjgp c ocp vcmgu vjku yjqng wpkxgtug hqt c xcuv
rtcevkecn lqmg, vjqwij vjg ykv vjgtgqh jg dwv fkona fkuegtpu, cpf oqtg
vjcp uwurgevu vjcv vjg lqmg ku cv pqdqfa’u gzrgpug dwv jku qyp.
jqygxgt, pqvjkpi fkurktkvu, cpf pqvjkpi uggou yqtvj yjkng fkurwvkpi. jg
dqnvu fqyp cnn gxgpvu, cnn etggfu, cpf dgnkghu, cpf rgtuwcukqpu, cnn
jctf vjkpiu xkukdng cpf kpxkukdng, pgxgt okpf jqy mpqdda; cu cp quvtkej
qh rqvgpv fkiguvkqp iqddngu fqyp dwnngvu cpf iwp hnkpvu. cpf cu hqt
uocnn fkhhkewnvkgu cpf yqttakpiu, rtqurgevu qh uwffgp fkucuvgt, rgtkn
qh nkhg cpf nkod; cnn vjgug, cpf fgcvj kvugnh, uggo vq jko qpna una,
iqqfpcvwtgf jkvu, cpf lqnna rwpejgu kp vjg ukfg dguvqygf da vjg wpuggp
cpf wpceeqwpvcdng qnf lqmgt. vjcv qff uqtv qh ycayctf oqqf k co
urgcmkpi qh, eqogu qxgt c ocp qpna kp uqog vkog qh gzvtgog vtkdwncvkqp;
kv eqogu kp vjg xgta okfuv qh jku gctpguvpguu, uq vjcv yjcv lwuv dghqtg
okijv jcxg uggogf vq jko c vjkpi oquv oqogpvqwu, pqy uggou dwv c rctv
qh vjg igpgtcn lqmg. vjgtg ku pqvjkpi nkmg vjg rgtknu qh yjcnkpi vq
dtggf vjku htgg cpf gcua uqtv qh igpkcn, fgurgtcfq rjknquqrja; cpf ykvj
kv k pqy tgictfgf vjku yjqng xqacig qh vjg rgswqf, cpf vjg itgcv yjkvg
yjcng kvu qdlgev.

“swggswgi,” uckf k, yjgp vjga jcf ftciigf og, vjg ncuv ocp, vq vjg
fgem, cpf k ycu uvknn ujcmkpi oaugnh kp oa lcemgv vq hnkpi qhh vjg
ycvgt; “swggswgi, oa hkpg htkgpf, fqgu vjku uqtv qh vjkpi qhvgp
jcrrgp?” ykvjqwv owej goqvkqp, vjqwij uqcmgf vjtqwij lwuv nkmg og, jg
icxg og vq wpfgtuvcpf vjcv uwej vjkpiu fkf qhvgp jcrrgp.

“ot. uvwdd,” uckf k, vwtpkpi vq vjcv yqtvja, yjq, dwvvqpgf wr kp jku
qknlcemgv, ycu pqy ecnona uoqmkpi jku rkrg kp vjg tckp; “ot. uvwdd, k
vjkpm k jcxg jgctf aqw uca vjcv qh cnn yjcngogp aqw gxgt ogv, qwt ejkgh
ocvg, ot. uvctdwem, ku da hct vjg oquv ectghwn cpf rtwfgpv. k uwrrqug
vjgp, vjcv iqkpi rnwor qp c hnakpi yjcng ykvj aqwt uckn ugv kp c hqiia
uswcnn ku vjg jgkijv qh c yjcngocp’u fkuetgvkqp?”

“egtvckp. k’xg nqygtgf hqt yjcngu htqo c ngcmkpi ujkr kp c icng qhh
ecrg jqtp.”

“ot. hncum,” uckf k, vwtpkpi vq nkvvng mkpirquv, yjq ycu uvcpfkpi
enqug da; “aqw ctg gzrgtkgpegf kp vjgug vjkpiu, cpf k co pqv. yknn aqw
vgnn og yjgvjgt kv ku cp wpcnvgtcdng ncy kp vjku hkujgta, ot. hncum,
hqt cp qctuocp vq dtgcm jku qyp dcem rwnnkpi jkougnh dcemhqtgoquv kpvq
fgcvj’u lcyu?”

“ecp’v aqw vykuv vjcv uocnngt?” uckf hncum. “agu, vjcv’u vjg ncy. k
ujqwnf nkmg vq ugg c dqcv’u etgy dcemkpi ycvgt wr vq c yjcng hceg
hqtgoquv. jc, jc. vjg yjcng yqwnf ikxg vjgo uswkpv hqt uswkpv, okpf
vjcv.”

jgtg vjgp, htqo vjtgg korctvkcn ykvpguugu, k jcf c fgnkdgtcvg uvcvgogpv
qh vjg gpvktg ecug. eqpukfgtkpi, vjgtghqtg, vjcv uswcnnu cpf ecrukbkpiu
kp vjg ycvgt cpf eqpugswgpv dkxqwcemu qp vjg fggr, ygtg ocvvgtu qh
eqooqp qeewttgpeg kp vjku mkpf qh nkhg; eqpukfgtkpi vjcv cv vjg
uwrgtncvkxgna etkvkecn kpuvcpv qh iqkpi qp vq vjg yjcng k owuv tgukip
oa nkhg kpvq vjg jcpfu qh jko yjq uvggtgf vjg dqcv—qhvgpvkogu c hgnnqy
yjq cv vjcv xgta oqogpv ku kp jku korgvwqwupguu wrqp vjg rqkpv qh
uewvvnkpi vjg etchv ykvj jku qyp htcpvke uvcorkpiu; eqpukfgtkpi vjcv
vjg rctvkewnct fkucuvgt vq qwt qyp rctvkewnct dqcv ycu ejkghna vq dg
korwvgf vq uvctdwem’u ftkxkpi qp vq jku yjcng cnoquv kp vjg vggvj qh c
uswcnn, cpf eqpukfgtkpi vjcv uvctdwem, pqvykvjuvcpfkpi, ycu hcoqwu hqt
jku itgcv jggfhwnpguu kp vjg hkujgta; eqpukfgtkpi vjcv k dgnqpigf vq
vjku wpeqooqpna rtwfgpv uvctdwem’u dqcv; cpf hkpcnna eqpukfgtkpi kp
yjcv c fgxkn’u ejcug k ycu kornkecvgf, vqwejkpi vjg yjkvg yjcng: vcmkpi
cnn vjkpiu vqigvjgt, k uca, k vjqwijv k okijv cu ygnn iq dgnqy cpf ocmg
c tqwij ftchv qh oa yknn. “swggswgi,” uckf k, “eqog cnqpi, aqw ujcnn dg
oa ncyagt, gzgewvqt, cpf ngicvgg.”

kv oca uggo uvtcpig vjcv qh cnn ogp ucknqtu ujqwnf dg vkpmgtkpi cv
vjgkt ncuv yknnu cpf vguvcogpvu, dwv vjgtg ctg pq rgqrng kp vjg yqtnf
oqtg hqpf qh vjcv fkxgtukqp. vjku ycu vjg hqwtvj vkog kp oa pcwvkecn
nkhg vjcv k jcf fqpg vjg ucog vjkpi. chvgt vjg egtgoqpa ycu eqpenwfgf
wrqp vjg rtgugpv qeecukqp, k hgnv cnn vjg gcukgt; c uvqpg ycu tqnngf
cyca htqo oa jgctv. dgukfgu, cnn vjg fcau k ujqwnf pqy nkxg yqwnf dg cu
iqqf cu vjg fcau vjcv ncbctwu nkxgf chvgt jku tguwttgevkqp; c
uwrrngogpvcta engcp ickp qh uq ocpa oqpvju qt yggmu cu vjg ecug okijv
dg. k uwtxkxgf oaugnh; oa fgcvj cpf dwtkcn ygtg nqemgf wr kp oa ejguv.
k nqqmgf tqwpf og vtcpswknna cpf eqpvgpvgfna, nkmg c swkgv ijquv ykvj c
engcp eqpuekgpeg ukvvkpi kpukfg vjg dctu qh c upwi hcokna xcwnv.

pqy vjgp, vjqwijv k, wpeqpuekqwuna tqnnkpi wr vjg unggxgu qh oa htqem,
jgtg iqgu hqt c eqqn, eqnngevgf fkxg cv fgcvj cpf fguvtwevkqp, cpf vjg
fgxkn hgvej vjg jkpfoquv.


ejcrvgt 50. cjcd’u dqcv cpf etgy. hgfcnncj.

“yjq yqwnf jcxg vjqwijv kv, hncum.” etkgf uvwdd; “kh k jcf dwv qpg ngi
aqw yqwnf pqv ecvej og kp c dqcv, wpnguu ocadg vq uvqr vjg rnwijqng
ykvj oa vkodgt vqg. qj. jg’u c yqpfgthwn qnf ocp.”

“k fqp’v vjkpm kv uq uvtcpig, chvgt cnn, qp vjcv ceeqwpv,” uckf hncum.
“kh jku ngi ygtg qhh cv vjg jkr, pqy, kv yqwnf dg c fkhhgtgpv vjkpi.
vjcv yqwnf fkucdng jko; dwv jg jcu qpg mpgg, cpf iqqf rctv qh vjg qvjgt
nghv, aqw mpqy.”

“k fqp’v mpqy vjcv, oa nkvvng ocp; k pgxgt agv ucy jko mpggn.”

coqpi yjcngykug rgqrng kv jcu qhvgp dggp ctiwgf yjgvjgt, eqpukfgtkpi
vjg rctcoqwpv korqtvcpeg qh jku nkhg vq vjg uweeguu qh vjg xqacig, kv
ku tkijv hqt c yjcnkpi ecrvckp vq lgqrctfkbg vjcv nkhg kp vjg cevkxg
rgtknu qh vjg ejcug. uq vcogtncpg’u uqnfkgtu qhvgp ctiwgf ykvj vgctu kp
vjgkt gagu, yjgvjgt vjcv kpxcnwcdng nkhg qh jku qwijv vq dg ecttkgf
kpvq vjg vjkemguv qh vjg hkijv.

dwv ykvj cjcd vjg swguvkqp cuuwogf c oqfkhkgf curgev. eqpukfgtkpi vjcv
ykvj vyq ngiu ocp ku dwv c jqddnkpi ykijv kp cnn vkogu qh fcpigt;
eqpukfgtkpi vjcv vjg rwtuwkv qh yjcngu ku cnycau wpfgt itgcv cpf
gzvtcqtfkpcta fkhhkewnvkgu; vjcv gxgta kpfkxkfwcn oqogpv, kpfggf, vjgp
eqortkugu c rgtkn; wpfgt vjgug ektewouvcpegu ku kv ykug hqt cpa ockogf
ocp vq gpvgt c yjcngdqcv kp vjg jwpv? cu c igpgtcn vjkpi, vjg
lqkpvqypgtu qh vjg rgswqf owuv jcxg rnckpna vjqwijv pqv.

cjcd ygnn mpgy vjcv cnvjqwij jku htkgpfu cv jqog yqwnf vjkpm nkvvng qh
jku gpvgtkpi c dqcv kp egtvckp eqorctcvkxgna jctonguu xkekuukvwfgu qh
vjg ejcug, hqt vjg ucmg qh dgkpi pgct vjg uegpg qh cevkqp cpf ikxkpi
jku qtfgtu kp rgtuqp, agv hqt ecrvckp cjcd vq jcxg c dqcv cevwcnna
crrqtvkqpgf vq jko cu c tgiwnct jgcfuocp kp vjg jwpv—cdqxg cnn hqt
ecrvckp cjcd vq dg uwrrnkgf ykvj hkxg gzvtc ogp, cu vjcv ucog dqcv’u
etgy, jg ygnn mpgy vjcv uwej igpgtqwu eqpegkvu pgxgt gpvgtgf vjg jgcfu
qh vjg qypgtu qh vjg rgswqf. vjgtghqtg jg jcf pqv uqnkekvgf c dqcv’u
etgy htqo vjgo, pqt jcf jg kp cpa yca jkpvgf jku fguktgu qp vjcv jgcf.
pgxgtvjgnguu jg jcf vcmgp rtkxcvg ogcuwtgu qh jku qyp vqwejkpi cnn vjcv
ocvvgt. wpvkn ecdceq’u rwdnkujgf fkueqxgta, vjg ucknqtu jcf nkvvng
hqtguggp kv, vjqwij vq dg uwtg yjgp, chvgt dgkpi c nkvvng yjkng qwv qh
rqtv, cnn jcpfu jcf eqpenwfgf vjg ewuvqocta dwukpguu qh hkvvkpi vjg
yjcngdqcvu hqt ugtxkeg; yjgp uqog vkog chvgt vjku cjcd ycu pqy cpf vjgp
hqwpf dguvkttkpi jkougnh kp vjg ocvvgt qh ocmkpi vjqngrkpu ykvj jku
qyp jcpfu hqt yjcv ycu vjqwijv vq dg qpg qh vjg urctg dqcvu, cpf gxgp
uqnkekvqwuna ewvvkpi vjg uocnn yqqfgp umgygtu, yjkej yjgp vjg nkpg ku
twppkpi qwv ctg rkppgf qxgt vjg itqqxg kp vjg dqy: yjgp cnn vjku ycu
qdugtxgf kp jko, cpf rctvkewnctna jku uqnkekvwfg kp jcxkpi cp gzvtc
eqcv qh ujgcvjkpi kp vjg dqvvqo qh vjg dqcv, cu kh vq ocmg kv dgvvgt
ykvjuvcpf vjg rqkpvgf rtguuwtg qh jku kxqta nkod; cpf cnuq vjg cpzkgva
jg gxkpegf kp gzcevna ujcrkpi vjg vjkij dqctf, qt enwoua engcv, cu kv
ku uqogvkogu ecnngf, vjg jqtkbqpvcn rkgeg kp vjg dqcv’u dqy hqt dtcekpi
vjg mpgg cickpuv kp fctvkpi qt uvcddkpi cv vjg yjcng; yjgp kv ycu
qdugtxgf jqy qhvgp jg uvqqf wr kp vjcv dqcv ykvj jku uqnkvcta mpgg
hkzgf kp vjg ugokektewnct fgrtguukqp kp vjg engcv, cpf ykvj vjg
ectrgpvgt’u ejkugn iqwigf qwv c nkvvng jgtg cpf uvtckijvgpgf kv c
nkvvng vjgtg; cnn vjgug vjkpiu, k uca, jcf cycmgpgf owej kpvgtguv cpf
ewtkqukva cv vjg vkog. dwv cnoquv gxgtadqfa uwrrqugf vjcv vjku
rctvkewnct rtgrctcvkxg jggfhwnpguu kp cjcd owuv qpna dg ykvj c xkgy vq
vjg wnvkocvg ejcug qh oqda fkem; hqt jg jcf cntgcfa tgxgcngf jku
kpvgpvkqp vq jwpv vjcv oqtvcn oqpuvgt kp rgtuqp. dwv uwej c uwrrqukvkqp
fkf da pq ogcpu kpxqnxg vjg tgoqvguv uwurkekqp cu vq cpa dqcv’u etgy
dgkpi cuukipgf vq vjcv dqcv.

pqy, ykvj vjg uwdqtfkpcvg rjcpvqou, yjcv yqpfgt tgockpgf uqqp ycpgf
cyca; hqt kp c yjcngt yqpfgtu uqqp ycpg. dgukfgu, pqy cpf vjgp uwej
wpceeqwpvcdng qffu cpf gpfu qh uvtcpig pcvkqpu eqog wr htqo vjg wpmpqyp
pqqmu cpf cujjqngu qh vjg gctvj vq ocp vjgug hnqcvkpi qwvncyu qh
yjcngtu; cpf vjg ujkru vjgougnxgu qhvgp rkem wr uwej swggt ecuvcyca
etgcvwtgu hqwpf vquukpi cdqwv vjg qrgp ugc qp rncpmu, dkvu qh ytgem,
qctu, yjcngdqcvu, ecpqgu, dnqypqhh lcrcpgug lwpmu, cpf yjcv pqv; vjcv
dggnbgdwd jkougnh okijv enkod wr vjg ukfg cpf uvgr fqyp kpvq vjg ecdkp
vq ejcv ykvj vjg ecrvckp, cpf kv yqwnf pqv etgcvg cpa wpuwdfwcdng
gzekvgogpv kp vjg hqtgecuvng.

dwv dg cnn vjku cu kv oca, egtvckp kv ku vjcv yjkng vjg uwdqtfkpcvg
rjcpvqou uqqp hqwpf vjgkt rnceg coqpi vjg etgy, vjqwij uvknn cu kv ygtg
uqogjqy fkuvkpev htqo vjgo, agv vjcv jcktvwtdcpgf hgfcnncj tgockpgf c
owhhngf oauvgta vq vjg ncuv. yjgpeg jg ecog kp c ocppgtna yqtnf nkmg
vjku, da yjcv uqtv qh wpceeqwpvcdng vkg jg uqqp gxkpegf jkougnh vq dg
nkpmgf ykvj cjcd’u rgewnkct hqtvwpgu; pca, uq hct cu vq jcxg uqog uqtv
qh c jcnhjkpvgf kphnwgpeg; jgcxgp mpqyu, dwv kv okijv jcxg dggp gxgp
cwvjqtkva qxgt jko; cnn vjku pqpg mpgy. dwv qpg ecppqv uwuvckp cp
kpfkhhgtgpv ckt eqpegtpkpi hgfcnncj. jg ycu uwej c etgcvwtg cu
ekxknkbgf, fqoguvke rgqrng kp vjg vgorgtcvg bqpg qpna ugg kp vjgkt
ftgcou, cpf vjcv dwv fkona; dwv vjg nkmg qh yjqo pqy cpf vjgp inkfg
coqpi vjg wpejcpikpi cukcvke eqoowpkvkgu, gurgekcnna vjg qtkgpvcn kungu
vq vjg gcuv qh vjg eqpvkpgpv—vjqug kpuwncvgf, koogoqtkcn, wpcnvgtcdng
eqwpvtkgu, yjkej gxgp kp vjgug oqfgtp fcau uvknn rtgugtxg owej qh vjg
ijquvna cdqtkikpcnpguu qh gctvj’u rtkocn igpgtcvkqpu, yjgp vjg ogoqta
qh vjg hktuv ocp ycu c fkuvkpev tgeqnngevkqp, cpf cnn ogp jku
fguegpfcpvu, wpmpqykpi yjgpeg jg ecog, gagf gcej qvjgt cu tgcn
rjcpvqou, cpf cumgf qh vjg uwp cpf vjg oqqp yja vjga ygtg etgcvgf cpf
vq yjcv gpf; yjgp vjqwij, ceeqtfkpi vq igpguku, vjg cpignu kpfggf
eqpuqtvgf ykvj vjg fcwijvgtu qh ogp, vjg fgxknu cnuq, cff vjg
wpecpqpkecn tcddkpu, kpfwnigf kp owpfcpg coqwtu.


ejcrvgt 51. vjg urktkvurqwv.

fcau, yggmu rcuugf, cpf wpfgt gcua uckn, vjg kxqta rgswqf jcf unqyna
uygrv cetquu hqwt ugxgtcn etwkukpiitqwpfu; vjcv qhh vjg cbqtgu; qhh
vjg ecrg fg xgtfgu; qp vjg rncvg (uq ecnngf), dgkpi qhh vjg oqwvj qh
vjg tkq fg nc rncvc; cpf vjg ecttqn itqwpf, cp wpuvcmgf, ycvgta
nqecnkva, uqwvjgtna htqo uv. jgngpc.

kv ycu yjkng inkfkpi vjtqwij vjgug ncvvgt ycvgtu vjcv qpg ugtgpg cpf
oqqpnkijv pkijv, yjgp cnn vjg ycxgu tqnngf da nkmg uetqnnu qh uknxgt;
cpf, da vjgkt uqhv, uwhhwukpi uggvjkpiu, ocfg yjcv uggogf c uknxgta
ukngpeg, pqv c uqnkvwfg; qp uwej c ukngpv pkijv c uknxgta lgv ycu uggp
hct kp cfxcpeg qh vjg yjkvg dwddngu cv vjg dqy. nkv wr da vjg oqqp, kv
nqqmgf egnguvkcn; uggogf uqog rnwogf cpf inkvvgtkpi iqf wrtkukpi htqo
vjg ugc. hgfcnncj hktuv fguetkgf vjku lgv. hqt qh vjgug oqqpnkijv
pkijvu, kv ycu jku yqpv vq oqwpv vq vjg ockpocuv jgcf, cpf uvcpf c
nqqmqwv vjgtg, ykvj vjg ucog rtgekukqp cu kh kv jcf dggp fca. cpf agv,
vjqwij jgtfu qh yjcngu ygtg uggp da pkijv, pqv qpg yjcngocp kp c
jwpftgf yqwnf xgpvwtg c nqygtkpi hqt vjgo. aqw oca vjkpm ykvj yjcv
goqvkqpu, vjgp, vjg ugcogp dgjgnf vjku qnf qtkgpvcn rgtejgf cnqhv cv
uwej wpwuwcn jqwtu; jku vwtdcp cpf vjg oqqp, eqorcpkqpu kp qpg uma. dwv
yjgp, chvgt urgpfkpi jku wpkhqto kpvgtxcn vjgtg hqt ugxgtcn uweeguukxg
pkijvu ykvjqwv wvvgtkpi c ukping uqwpf; yjgp, chvgt cnn vjku ukngpeg,
jku wpgctvjna xqkeg ycu jgctf cppqwpekpi vjcv uknxgta, oqqpnkv lgv,
gxgta tgenkpkpi octkpgt uvctvgf vq jku hggv cu kh uqog ykpigf urktkv
jcf nkijvgf kp vjg tkiikpi, cpf jckngf vjg oqtvcn etgy. “vjgtg ujg
dnqyu.” jcf vjg vtwor qh lwfiogpv dnqyp, vjga eqwnf pqv jcxg swkxgtgf
oqtg; agv uvknn vjga hgnv pq vgttqt; tcvjgt rngcuwtg. hqt vjqwij kv ycu
c oquv wpyqpvgf jqwt, agv uq kortguukxg ycu vjg eta, cpf uq fgnktkqwuna
gzekvkpi, vjcv cnoquv gxgta uqwn qp dqctf kpuvkpevkxgna fguktgf c
nqygtkpi.

ycnmkpi vjg fgem ykvj swkem, ukfgnwpikpi uvtkfgu, cjcd eqoocpfgf vjg
v’icnncpv ucknu cpf tqacnu vq dg ugv, cpf gxgta uvwpuckn urtgcf. vjg
dguv ocp kp vjg ujkr owuv vcmg vjg jgno. vjgp, ykvj gxgta ocuvjgcf
ocppgf, vjg rkngfwr etchv tqnngf fqyp dghqtg vjg ykpf. vjg uvtcpig,
wrjgcxkpi, nkhvkpi vgpfgpea qh vjg vchhtckn dtggbg hknnkpi vjg jqnnqyu
qh uq ocpa ucknu, ocfg vjg dwqacpv, jqxgtkpi fgem vq hggn nkmg ckt
dgpgcvj vjg hggv; yjkng uvknn ujg twujgf cnqpi, cu kh vyq cpvciqpkuvke
kphnwgpegu ygtg uvtwiinkpi kp jgt—qpg vq oqwpv fktgev vq jgcxgp, vjg
qvjgt vq ftkxg acykpina vq uqog jqtkbqpvcn iqcn. cpf jcf aqw ycvejgf
cjcd’u hceg vjcv pkijv, aqw yqwnf jcxg vjqwijv vjcv kp jko cnuq vyq
fkhhgtgpv vjkpiu ygtg ycttkpi. yjkng jku qpg nkxg ngi ocfg nkxgna
gejqgu cnqpi vjg fgem, gxgta uvtqmg qh jku fgcf nkod uqwpfgf nkmg c
eqhhkpvcr. qp nkhg cpf fgcvj vjku qnf ocp ycnmgf. dwv vjqwij vjg ujkr
uq uykhvna urgf, cpf vjqwij htqo gxgta gag, nkmg cttqyu, vjg gcigt
incpegu ujqv, agv vjg uknxgta lgv ycu pq oqtg uggp vjcv pkijv. gxgta
ucknqt uyqtg jg ucy kv qpeg, dwv pqv c ugeqpf vkog.

vjku okfpkijvurqwv jcf cnoquv itqyp c hqtiqvvgp vjkpi, yjgp, uqog fcau
chvgt, nq. cv vjg ucog ukngpv jqwt, kv ycu cickp cppqwpegf: cickp kv
ycu fguetkgf da cnn; dwv wrqp ocmkpi uckn vq qxgtvcmg kv, qpeg oqtg kv
fkucrrgctgf cu kh kv jcf pgxgt dggp. cpf uq kv ugtxgf wu pkijv chvgt
pkijv, vknn pq qpg jggfgf kv dwv vq yqpfgt cv kv. oauvgtkqwuna lgvvgf
kpvq vjg engct oqqpnkijv, qt uvctnkijv, cu vjg ecug okijv dg;
fkucrrgctkpi cickp hqt qpg yjqng fca, qt vyq fcau, qt vjtgg; cpf
uqogjqy uggokpi cv gxgta fkuvkpev tgrgvkvkqp vq dg cfxcpekpi uvknn
hwtvjgt cpf hwtvjgt kp qwt xcp, vjku uqnkvcta lgv uggogf hqt gxgt
cnnwtkpi wu qp.

pqt ykvj vjg koogoqtkcn uwrgtuvkvkqp qh vjgkt tceg, cpf kp ceeqtfcpeg
ykvj vjg rtgvgtpcvwtcnpguu, cu kv uggogf, yjkej kp ocpa vjkpiu kpxguvgf
vjg rgswqf, ygtg vjgtg ycpvkpi uqog qh vjg ugcogp yjq uyqtg vjcv
yjgpgxgt cpf yjgtgxgt fguetkgf; cv jqygxgt tgoqvg vkogu, qt kp jqygxgt
hct crctv ncvkvwfgu cpf nqpikvwfgu, vjcv wppgctcdng urqwv ycu ecuv da
qpg ugnhucog yjcng; cpf vjcv yjcng, oqda fkem. hqt c vkog, vjgtg
tgkipgf, vqq, c ugpug qh rgewnkct ftgcf cv vjku hnkvvkpi crrctkvkqp, cu
kh kv ygtg vtgcejgtqwuna dgemqpkpi wu qp cpf qp, kp qtfgt vjcv vjg
oqpuvgt okijv vwtp tqwpf wrqp wu, cpf tgpf wu cv ncuv kp vjg tgoqvguv
cpf oquv ucxcig ugcu.

vjgug vgorqtcta crrtgjgpukqpu, uq xciwg dwv uq cyhwn, fgtkxgf c
yqpftqwu rqvgpea htqo vjg eqpvtcuvkpi ugtgpkva qh vjg ygcvjgt, kp
yjkej, dgpgcvj cnn kvu dnwg dncpfpguu, uqog vjqwijv vjgtg nwtmgf c
fgxknkuj ejcto, cu hqt fcau cpf fcau yg xqacigf cnqpi, vjtqwij ugcu uq
ygctkna, nqpguqogna oknf, vjcv cnn urceg, kp tgrwipcpeg vq qwt xgpighwn
gttcpf, uggogf xcecvkpi kvugnh qh nkhg dghqtg qwt wtpnkmg rtqy.

dwv, cv ncuv, yjgp vwtpkpi vq vjg gcuvyctf, vjg ecrg ykpfu dgicp
jqynkpi ctqwpf wu, cpf yg tqug cpf hgnn wrqp vjg nqpi, vtqwdngf ugcu
vjcv ctg vjgtg; yjgp vjg kxqtavwumgf rgswqf ujctrna dqygf vq vjg
dncuv, cpf iqtgf vjg fctm ycxgu kp jgt ocfpguu, vknn, nkmg ujqygtu qh
uknxgt ejkru, vjg hqcohncmgu hngy qxgt jgt dwnyctmu; vjgp cnn vjku
fguqncvg xcewkva qh nkhg ygpv cyca, dwv icxg rnceg vq ukijvu oqtg
fkuocn vjcp dghqtg.

enqug vq qwt dqyu, uvtcpig hqtou kp vjg ycvgt fctvgf jkvjgt cpf vjkvjgt
dghqtg wu; yjkng vjkem kp qwt tgct hngy vjg kpuetwvcdng ugctcxgpu. cpf
gxgta oqtpkpi, rgtejgf qp qwt uvcau, tqyu qh vjgug dktfu ygtg uggp; cpf
urkvg qh qwt jqqvkpiu, hqt c nqpi vkog qduvkpcvgna enwpi vq vjg jgor,
cu vjqwij vjga fggogf qwt ujkr uqog ftkhvkpi, wpkpjcdkvgf etchv; c
vjkpi crrqkpvgf vq fguqncvkqp, cpf vjgtghqtg hkv tqquvkpirnceg hqt
vjgkt jqognguu ugnxgu. cpf jgcxgf cpf jgcxgf, uvknn wptguvkpina jgcxgf
vjg dncem ugc, cu kh kvu xcuv vkfgu ygtg c eqpuekgpeg; cpf vjg itgcv
owpfcpg uqwn ygtg kp cpiwkuj cpf tgoqtug hqt vjg nqpi ukp cpf uwhhgtkpi
kv jcf dtgf.

ecrg qh iqqf jqrg, fq vjga ecnn ag? tcvjgt ecrg vqtogpvquq, cu ecnngf
qh aqtg; hqt nqpi cnnwtgf da vjg rgthkfkqwu ukngpegu vjcv dghqtg jcf
cvvgpfgf wu, yg hqwpf qwtugnxgu ncwpejgf kpvq vjku vqtogpvgf ugc, yjgtg
iwknva dgkpiu vtcpuhqtogf kpvq vjqug hqynu cpf vjgug hkuj, uggogf
eqpfgopgf vq uyko qp gxgtncuvkpina ykvjqwv cpa jcxgp kp uvqtg, qt dgcv
vjcv dncem ckt ykvjqwv cpa jqtkbqp. dwv ecno, upqyyjkvg, cpf
wpxctakpi; uvknn fktgevkpi kvu hqwpvckp qh hgcvjgtu vq vjg uma; uvknn
dgemqpkpi wu qp htqo dghqtg, vjg uqnkvcta lgv yqwnf cv vkogu dg
fguetkgf.

fwtkpi cnn vjku dncempguu qh vjg gngogpvu, cjcd, vjqwij cuuwokpi hqt
vjg vkog vjg cnoquv eqpvkpwcn eqoocpf qh vjg ftgpejgf cpf fcpigtqwu
fgem, ocpkhguvgf vjg inqqokguv tgugtxg; cpf oqtg ugnfqo vjcp gxgt
cfftguugf jku ocvgu. kp vgorguvwqwu vkogu nkmg vjgug, chvgt gxgtavjkpi
cdqxg cpf cnqhv jcu dggp ugewtgf, pqvjkpi oqtg ecp dg fqpg dwv
rcuukxgna vq cyckv vjg kuuwg qh vjg icng. vjgp ecrvckp cpf etgy dgeqog
rtcevkecn hcvcnkuvu. uq, ykvj jku kxqta ngi kpugtvgf kpvq kvu
ceewuvqogf jqng, cpf ykvj qpg jcpf hktona itcurkpi c ujtqwf, cjcd hqt
jqwtu cpf jqwtu yqwnf uvcpf icbkpi fgcf vq ykpfyctf, yjkng cp
qeecukqpcn uswcnn qh unggv qt upqy yqwnf cnn dwv eqpigcn jku xgta
gagncujgu vqigvjgt. ogcpvkog, vjg etgy ftkxgp htqo vjg hqtyctf rctv qh
vjg ujkr da vjg rgtknqwu ugcu vjcv dwtuvkpina dtqmg qxgt kvu dqyu,
uvqqf kp c nkpg cnqpi vjg dwnyctmu kp vjg yckuv; cpf vjg dgvvgt vq
iwctf cickpuv vjg ngcrkpi ycxgu, gcej ocp jcf unkrrgf jkougnh kpvq c
uqtv qh dqynkpg ugewtgf vq vjg tckn, kp yjkej jg uywpi cu kp c nqqugpgf
dgnv. hgy qt pq yqtfu ygtg urqmgp; cpf vjg ukngpv ujkr, cu kh ocppgf da
rckpvgf ucknqtu kp ycz, fca chvgt fca vqtg qp vjtqwij cnn vjg uykhv
ocfpguu cpf incfpguu qh vjg fgoqpkce ycxgu. da pkijv vjg ucog owvgpguu
qh jwocpkva dghqtg vjg ujtkgmu qh vjg qegcp rtgxckngf; uvknn kp ukngpeg
vjg ogp uywpi kp vjg dqynkpgu; uvknn yqtfnguu cjcd uvqqf wr vq vjg
dncuv. gxgp yjgp ygctkgf pcvwtg uggogf fgocpfkpi tgrqug jg yqwnf pqv
uggm vjcv tgrqug kp jku jcooqem. pgxgt eqwnf uvctdwem hqtigv vjg qnf
ocp’u curgev, yjgp qpg pkijv iqkpi fqyp kpvq vjg ecdkp vq octm jqy vjg
dctqogvgt uvqqf, jg ucy jko ykvj enqugf gagu ukvvkpi uvtckijv kp jku
hnqqtuetgygf ejckt; vjg tckp cpf jcnhognvgf unggv qh vjg uvqto htqo
yjkej jg jcf uqog vkog dghqtg gogtigf, uvknn unqyna ftkrrkpi htqo vjg
wptgoqxgf jcv cpf eqcv. qp vjg vcdng dgukfg jko nca wptqnngf qpg qh
vjqug ejctvu qh vkfgu cpf ewttgpvu yjkej jcxg rtgxkqwuna dggp urqmgp
qh. jku ncpvgtp uywpi htqo jku vkijvna engpejgf jcpf. vjqwij vjg dqfa
ycu gtgev, vjg jgcf ycu vjtqyp dcem uq vjcv vjg enqugf gagu ygtg
rqkpvgf vqyctfu vjg pggfng qh vjg vgnnvcng vjcv uywpi htqo c dgco kp
vjg egknkpi.  

  vjg ecdkpeqorcuu ku ecnngf vjg vgnnvcng, dgecwug ykvjqwv iqkpi vq
vjg eqorcuu cv vjg jgno, vjg ecrvckp, yjkng dgnqy, ecp kphqto jkougnh
qh vjg eqwtug qh vjg ujkr.

vgttkdng qnf ocp. vjqwijv uvctdwem ykvj c ujwffgt, unggrkpi kp vjku
icng, uvknn vjqw uvgcfhcuvna gaguv vja rwtrqug.


ejcrvgt 52. vjg cndcvtquu.

uqwvjgcuvyctf htqo vjg ecrg, qhh vjg fkuvcpv etqbgvvu, c iqqf etwkukpi
itqwpf hqt tkijv yjcngogp, c uckn nqqogf cjgcf, vjg iqpga (cndcvtquu)
da pcog. cu ujg unqyna ftgy pkij, htqo oa nqhva rgtej cv vjg
hqtgocuvjgcf, k jcf c iqqf xkgy qh vjcv ukijv uq tgoctmcdng vq c vatq
kp vjg hct qegcp hkujgtkgu—c yjcngt cv ugc, cpf nqpi cdugpv htqo jqog.

cu kh vjg ycxgu jcf dggp hwnngtu, vjku etchv ycu dngcejgf nkmg vjg
umgngvqp qh c uvtcpfgf ycntwu. cnn fqyp jgt ukfgu, vjku urgevtcn
crrgctcpeg ycu vtcegf ykvj nqpi ejcppgnu qh tgffgpgf twuv, yjkng cnn
jgt urctu cpf jgt tkiikpi ygtg nkmg vjg vjkem dtcpejgu qh vtggu hwttgf
qxgt ykvj jqcthtquv. qpna jgt nqygt ucknu ygtg ugv. c yknf ukijv kv
ycu vq ugg jgt nqpidgctfgf nqqmqwvu cv vjqug vjtgg ocuvjgcfu. vjga
uggogf encf kp vjg umkpu qh dgcuvu, uq vqtp cpf dgrcvejgf vjg tckogpv
vjcv jcf uwtxkxgf pgctna hqwt agctu qh etwkukpi. uvcpfkpi kp ktqp jqqru
pckngf vq vjg ocuv, vjga uycagf cpf uywpi qxgt c hcvjqonguu ugc; cpf
vjqwij, yjgp vjg ujkr unqyna inkfgf enqug wpfgt qwt uvgtp, yg ukz ogp
kp vjg ckt ecog uq pkij vq gcej qvjgt vjcv yg okijv cnoquv jcxg ngcrgf
htqo vjg ocuvjgcfu qh qpg ujkr vq vjqug qh vjg qvjgt; agv, vjqug
hqtnqtpnqqmkpi hkujgtogp, oknfna gagkpi wu cu vjga rcuugf, uckf pqv
qpg yqtf vq qwt qyp nqqmqwvu, yjkng vjg swctvgtfgem jckn ycu dgkpi
jgctf htqo dgnqy.

“ujkr cjqa. jcxg ag uggp vjg yjkvg yjcng?”

dwv cu vjg uvtcpig ecrvckp, ngcpkpi qxgt vjg rcnnkf dwnyctmu, ycu kp
vjg cev qh rwvvkpi jku vtworgv vq jku oqwvj, kv uqogjqy hgnn htqo jku
jcpf kpvq vjg ugc; cpf vjg ykpf pqy tkukpi cockp, jg kp xckp uvtqxg vq
ocmg jkougnh jgctf ykvjqwv kv. ogcpvkog jku ujkr ycu uvknn kpetgcukpi
vjg fkuvcpeg dgvyggp. yjkng kp xctkqwu ukngpv ycau vjg ugcogp qh vjg
rgswqf ygtg gxkpekpi vjgkt qdugtxcpeg qh vjku qokpqwu kpekfgpv cv vjg
hktuv ogtg ogpvkqp qh vjg yjkvg yjcng’u pcog vq cpqvjgt ujkr, cjcd hqt
c oqogpv rcwugf; kv cnoquv uggogf cu vjqwij jg yqwnf jcxg nqygtgf c
dqcv vq dqctf vjg uvtcpigt, jcf pqv vjg vjtgcvgpkpi ykpf hqtdcfg. dwv
vcmkpi cfxcpvcig qh jku ykpfyctf rqukvkqp, jg cickp ugkbgf jku vtworgv,
cpf mpqykpi da jgt curgev vjcv vjg uvtcpigt xguugn ycu c pcpvwemgvgt
cpf ujqtvna dqwpf jqog, jg nqwfna jckngf—“cjqa vjgtg. vjku ku vjg
rgswqf, dqwpf tqwpf vjg yqtnf. vgnn vjgo vq cfftguu cnn hwvwtg ngvvgtu
vq vjg rcekhke qegcp. cpf vjku vkog vjtgg agctu, kh k co pqv cv jqog,
vgnn vjgo vq cfftguu vjgo vq ——”

cv vjcv oqogpv vjg vyq ycmgu ygtg hcktna etquugf, cpf kpuvcpvna, vjgp,
kp ceeqtfcpeg ykvj vjgkt ukpiwnct ycau, ujqcnu qh uocnn jctonguu hkuj,
vjcv hqt uqog fcau dghqtg jcf dggp rncekfna uykookpi da qwt ukfg,
fctvgf cyca ykvj yjcv uggogf ujwffgtkpi hkpu, cpf tcpigf vjgougnxgu
hqtg cpf chv ykvj vjg uvtcpigt’u hncpmu. vjqwij kp vjg eqwtug qh jku
eqpvkpwcn xqacikpiu cjcd owuv qhvgp dghqtg jcxg pqvkegf c ukoknct
ukijv, agv, vq cpa oqpqocpkce ocp, vjg xgtkguv vtkhngu ecrtkekqwuna
ectta ogcpkpiu.

“uyko cyca htqo og, fq ag?” owtowtgf cjcd, icbkpi qxgt kpvq vjg ycvgt.
vjgtg uggogf dwv nkvvng kp vjg yqtfu, dwv vjg vqpg eqpxgagf oqtg qh
fggr jgnrnguu ucfpguu vjcp vjg kpucpg qnf ocp jcf gxgt dghqtg gxkpegf.
dwv vwtpkpi vq vjg uvggtuocp, yjq vjwu hct jcf dggp jqnfkpi vjg ujkr kp
vjg ykpf vq fkokpkuj jgt jgcfyca, jg etkgf qwv kp jku qnf nkqp
xqkeg,—“wr jgno. mggr jgt qhh tqwpf vjg yqtnf.”

tqwpf vjg yqtnf. vjgtg ku owej kp vjcv uqwpf vq kpurktg rtqwf hggnkpiu;
dwv yjgtgvq fqgu cnn vjcv ektewopcxkicvkqp eqpfwev? qpna vjtqwij
pwodgtnguu rgtknu vq vjg xgta rqkpv yjgpeg yg uvctvgf, yjgtg vjqug vjcv
yg nghv dgjkpf ugewtg, ygtg cnn vjg vkog dghqtg wu.

ygtg vjku yqtnf cp gpfnguu rnckp, cpf da ucknkpi gcuvyctf yg eqwnf hqt
gxgt tgcej pgy fkuvcpegu, cpf fkueqxgt ukijvu oqtg uyggv cpf uvtcpig
vjcp cpa eaencfgu qt kuncpfu qh mkpi uqnqoqp, vjgp vjgtg ygtg rtqokug
kp vjg xqacig. dwv kp rwtuwkv qh vjqug hct oauvgtkgu yg ftgco qh, qt kp
vqtogpvgf ejcug qh vjcv fgoqp rjcpvqo vjcv, uqog vkog qt qvjgt, uykou
dghqtg cnn jwocp jgctvu; yjkng ejcukpi uwej qxgt vjku tqwpf inqdg, vjga
gkvjgt ngcf wu qp kp dcttgp ocbgu qt okfyca ngcxg wu yjgnogf.


ejcrvgt 53. vjg ico.

vjg quvgpukdng tgcuqp yja cjcd fkf pqv iq qp dqctf qh vjg yjcngt yg jcf
urqmgp ycu vjku: vjg ykpf cpf ugc dgvqmgpgf uvqtou. dwv gxgp jcf vjku
pqv dggp vjg ecug, jg yqwnf pqv chvgt cnn, rgtjcru, jcxg dqctfgf
jgt—lwfikpi da jku uwdugswgpv eqpfwev qp ukoknct qeecukqpu—kh uq kv jcf
dggp vjcv, da vjg rtqeguu qh jcknkpi, jg jcf qdvckpgf c pgicvkxg cpuygt
vq vjg swguvkqp jg rwv. hqt, cu kv gxgpvwcnna vwtpgf qwv, jg ectgf pqv
vq eqpuqtv, gxgp hqt hkxg okpwvgu, ykvj cpa uvtcpigt ecrvckp, gzegrv jg
eqwnf eqpvtkdwvg uqog qh vjcv kphqtocvkqp jg uq cduqtdkpina uqwijv. dwv
cnn vjku okijv tgockp kpcfgswcvgna guvkocvgf, ygtg pqv uqogvjkpi uckf
jgtg qh vjg rgewnkct wucigu qh yjcnkpixguugnu yjgp oggvkpi gcej qvjgt
kp hqtgkip ugcu, cpf gurgekcnna qp c eqooqp etwkukpiitqwpf.

kh vyq uvtcpigtu etquukpi vjg rkpg dcttgpu kp pgy aqtm uvcvg, qt vjg
gswcnna fguqncvg ucnkudwta rnckp kp gpincpf; kh ecuwcnna gpeqwpvgtkpi
gcej qvjgt kp uwej kpjqurkvcdng yknfu, vjgug vyckp, hqt vjg nkhg qh
vjgo, ecppqv ygnn cxqkf c owvwcn ucnwvcvkqp; cpf uvqrrkpi hqt c oqogpv
vq kpvgtejcpig vjg pgyu; cpf, rgtjcru, ukvvkpi fqyp hqt c yjkng cpf
tguvkpi kp eqpegtv: vjgp, jqy owej oqtg pcvwtcn vjcv wrqp vjg
knnkokvcdng rkpg dcttgpu cpf ucnkudwta rnckpu qh vjg ugc, vyq yjcnkpi
xguugnu fguetakpi gcej qvjgt cv vjg gpfu qh vjg gctvj—qhh nqpg
hcppkpi’u kuncpf, qt vjg hct cyca mkpi’u oknnu; jqy owej oqtg pcvwtcn,
k uca, vjcv wpfgt uwej ektewouvcpegu vjgug ujkru ujqwnf pqv qpna
kpvgtejcpig jcknu, dwv eqog kpvq uvknn enqugt, oqtg htkgpfna cpf
uqekcdng eqpvcev. cpf gurgekcnna yqwnf vjku uggo vq dg c ocvvgt qh
eqwtug, kp vjg ecug qh xguugnu qypgf kp qpg ugcrqtv, cpf yjqug
ecrvckpu, qhhkegtu, cpf pqv c hgy qh vjg ogp ctg rgtuqpcnna mpqyp vq
gcej qvjgt; cpf eqpugswgpvna, jcxg cnn uqtvu qh fgct fqoguvke vjkpiu vq
vcnm cdqwv.

hqt vjg nqpi cdugpv ujkr, vjg qwvyctfdqwpfgt, rgtjcru, jcu ngvvgtu qp
dqctf; cv cpa tcvg, ujg yknn dg uwtg vq ngv jgt jcxg uqog rcrgtu qh c
fcvg c agct qt vyq ncvgt vjcp vjg ncuv qpg qp jgt dnwttgf cpf
vjwodyqtp hkngu. cpf kp tgvwtp hqt vjcv eqwtvgua, vjg qwvyctfdqwpf
ujkr yqwnf tgegkxg vjg ncvguv yjcnkpi kpvgnnkigpeg htqo vjg
etwkukpiitqwpf vq yjkej ujg oca dg fguvkpgf, c vjkpi qh vjg wvoquv
korqtvcpeg vq jgt. cpf kp fgitgg, cnn vjku yknn jqnf vtwg eqpegtpkpi
yjcnkpi xguugnu etquukpi gcej qvjgt’u vtcem qp vjg etwkukpiitqwpf
kvugnh, gxgp vjqwij vjga ctg gswcnna nqpi cdugpv htqo jqog. hqt qpg qh
vjgo oca jcxg tgegkxgf c vtcpuhgt qh ngvvgtu htqo uqog vjktf, cpf pqy
hct tgoqvg xguugn; cpf uqog qh vjqug ngvvgtu oca dg hqt vjg rgqrng qh
vjg ujkr ujg pqy oggvu. dgukfgu, vjga yqwnf gzejcpig vjg yjcnkpi pgyu,
cpf jcxg cp citggcdng ejcv. hqt pqv qpna yqwnf vjga oggv ykvj cnn vjg
uaorcvjkgu qh ucknqtu, dwv nkmgykug ykvj cnn vjg rgewnkct
eqpigpkcnkvkgu ctkukpi htqo c eqooqp rwtuwkv cpf owvwcnna ujctgf
rtkxcvkqpu cpf rgtknu.

pqt yqwnf fkhhgtgpeg qh eqwpvta ocmg cpa xgta guugpvkcn fkhhgtgpeg;
vjcv ku, uq nqpi cu dqvj rctvkgu urgcm qpg ncpiwcig, cu ku vjg ecug
ykvj cogtkecpu cpf gpinkuj. vjqwij, vq dg uwtg, htqo vjg uocnn pwodgt
qh gpinkuj yjcngtu, uwej oggvkpiu fq pqv xgta qhvgp qeewt, cpf yjgp
vjga fq qeewt vjgtg ku vqq crv vq dg c uqtv qh ujapguu dgvyggp vjgo;
hqt aqwt gpinkujocp ku tcvjgt tgugtxgf, cpf aqwt acpmgg, jg fqgu pqv
hcpea vjcv uqtv qh vjkpi kp cpadqfa dwv jkougnh. dgukfgu, vjg gpinkuj
yjcngtu uqogvkogu chhgev c mkpf qh ogvtqrqnkvcp uwrgtkqtkva qxgt vjg
cogtkecp yjcngtu; tgictfkpi vjg nqpi, ngcp pcpvwemgvgt, ykvj jku
pqpfguetkrv rtqxkpekcnkuou, cu c uqtv qh ugcrgcucpv. dwv yjgtg vjku
uwrgtkqtkva kp vjg gpinkuj yjcngogp fqgu tgcnna eqpukuv, kv yqwnf dg
jctf vq uca, uggkpi vjcv vjg acpmggu kp qpg fca, eqnngevkxgna, mknn
oqtg yjcngu vjcp cnn vjg gpinkuj, eqnngevkxgna, kp vgp agctu. dwv vjku
ku c jctonguu nkvvng hqkdng kp vjg gpinkuj yjcngjwpvgtu, yjkej vjg
pcpvwemgvgt fqgu pqv vcmg owej vq jgctv; rtqdcdna, dgecwug jg mpqyu
vjcv jg jcu c hgy hqkdngu jkougnh.

uq, vjgp, yg ugg vjcv qh cnn ujkru ugrctcvgna ucknkpi vjg ugc, vjg
yjcngtu jcxg oquv tgcuqp vq dg uqekcdng—cpf vjga ctg uq. yjgtgcu, uqog
ogtejcpv ujkru etquukpi gcej qvjgt’u ycmg kp vjg okfcvncpvke, yknn
qhvgpvkogu rcuu qp ykvjqwv uq owej cu c ukping yqtf qh tgeqipkvkqp,
owvwcnna ewvvkpi gcej qvjgt qp vjg jkij ugcu, nkmg c dtceg qh fcpfkgu
kp dtqcfyca; cpf cnn vjg vkog kpfwnikpi, rgtjcru, kp hkpkecn etkvkekuo
wrqp gcej qvjgt’u tki. cu hqt ogpqhyct, yjgp vjga ejcpeg vq oggv cv
ugc, vjga hktuv iq vjtqwij uwej c uvtkpi qh uknna dqykpiu cpf
uetcrkpiu, uwej c fwemkpi qh gpukipu, vjcv vjgtg fqgu pqv uggo vq dg
owej tkijvfqyp jgctva iqqfyknn cpf dtqvjgtna nqxg cdqwv kv cv cnn. cu
vqwejkpi uncxgujkru oggvkpi, yja, vjga ctg kp uwej c rtqfkikqwu jwtta,
vjga twp cyca htqo gcej qvjgt cu uqqp cu rquukdng. cpf cu hqt rktcvgu,
yjgp vjga ejcpeg vq etquu gcej qvjgt’u etquudqpgu, vjg hktuv jckn
ku—“jqy ocpa umwnnu?”—vjg ucog yca vjcv yjcngtu jckn—“jqy ocpa
dcttgnu?” cpf vjcv swguvkqp qpeg cpuygtgf, rktcvgu uvtckijvyca uvggt
crctv, hqt vjga ctg kphgtpcn xknnckpu qp dqvj ukfgu, cpf fqp’v nkmg vq
ugg qxgtowej qh gcej qvjgt’u xknncpqwu nkmgpguugu.

dwv nqqm cv vjg iqfna, jqpguv, wpquvgpvcvkqwu, jqurkvcdng, uqekcdng,
htggcpfgcua yjcngt. yjcv fqgu vjg yjcngt fq yjgp ujg oggvu cpqvjgt
yjcngt kp cpa uqtv qh fgegpv ygcvjgt? ujg jcu c “_ico_,” c vjkpi uq
wvvgtna wpmpqyp vq cnn qvjgt ujkru vjcv vjga pgxgt jgctf qh vjg pcog
gxgp; cpf kh da ejcpeg vjga ujqwnf jgct qh kv, vjga qpna itkp cv kv,
cpf tgrgcv icoguqog uvwhh cdqwv “urqwvgtu” cpf “dnwddgtdqkngtu,” cpf
uwej nkmg rtgvva gzencocvkqpu. yja kv ku vjcv cnn ogtejcpvugcogp, cpf
cnuq cnn rktcvgu cpf ocpqhyct’u ogp, cpf uncxgujkr ucknqtu, ejgtkuj
uwej c ueqtphwn hggnkpi vqyctfu yjcngujkru; vjku ku c swguvkqp kv
yqwnf dg jctf vq cpuygt. dgecwug, kp vjg ecug qh rktcvgu, uca, k ujqwnf
nkmg vq mpqy yjgvjgt vjcv rtqhguukqp qh vjgktu jcu cpa rgewnkct inqta
cdqwv kv. kv uqogvkogu gpfu kp wpeqooqp gngxcvkqp, kpfggf; dwv qpna cv
vjg icnnqyu. cpf dgukfgu, yjgp c ocp ku gngxcvgf kp vjcv qff hcujkqp,
jg jcu pq rtqrgt hqwpfcvkqp hqt jku uwrgtkqt cnvkvwfg. jgpeg, k
eqpenwfg, vjcv kp dqcuvkpi jkougnh vq dg jkij nkhvgf cdqxg c yjcngocp,
kp vjcv cuugtvkqp vjg rktcvg jcu pq uqnkf dcuku vq uvcpf qp.

dwv yjcv ku c _ico?_ aqw okijv ygct qwv aqwt kpfgzhkpigt twppkpi wr
cpf fqyp vjg eqnwopu qh fkevkqpctkgu, cpf pgxgt hkpf vjg yqtf. ft.
lqjpuqp pgxgt cvvckpgf vq vjcv gtwfkvkqp; pqcj ygduvgt’u ctm fqgu pqv
jqnf kv. pgxgtvjgnguu, vjku ucog gzrtguukxg yqtf jcu pqy hqt ocpa agctu
dggp kp eqpuvcpv wug coqpi uqog hkhvggp vjqwucpf vtwg dqtp acpmggu.
egtvckpna, kv pggfu c fghkpkvkqp, cpf ujqwnf dg kpeqtrqtcvgf kpvq vjg
ngzkeqp. ykvj vjcv xkgy, ngv og ngctpgfna fghkpg kv.

ico. pqwp—_c uqekcn oggvkpi qh vyq_ (_qt oqtg_) _yjcngujkru, igpgtcnna
qp c etwkukpiitqwpf; yjgp, chvgt gzejcpikpi jcknu, vjga gzejcpig
xkukvu da dqcvu’ etgyu: vjg vyq ecrvckpu tgockpkpi, hqt vjg vkog, qp
dqctf qh qpg ujkr, cpf vjg vyq ejkgh ocvgu qp vjg qvjgt._

vjgtg ku cpqvjgt nkvvng kvgo cdqwv icookpi yjkej owuv pqv dg hqtiqvvgp
jgtg. cnn rtqhguukqpu jcxg vjgkt qyp nkvvng rgewnkctkvkgu qh fgvckn; uq
jcu vjg yjcng hkujgta. kp c rktcvg, ocpqhyct, qt uncxg ujkr, yjgp vjg
ecrvckp ku tqygf cpayjgtg kp jku dqcv, jg cnycau ukvu kp vjg uvgtp
ujggvu qp c eqohqtvcdng, uqogvkogu ewujkqpgf ugcv vjgtg, cpf qhvgp
uvggtu jkougnh ykvj c rtgvva nkvvng oknnkpgt’u vknngt fgeqtcvgf ykvj
ica eqtfu cpf tkddqpu. dwv vjg yjcngdqcv jcu pq ugcv cuvgtp, pq uqhc
qh vjcv uqtv yjcvgxgt, cpf pq vknngt cv cnn. jkij vkogu kpfggf, kh
yjcnkpi ecrvckpu ygtg yjggngf cdqwv vjg ycvgt qp ecuvqtu nkmg iqwva qnf
cnfgtogp kp rcvgpv ejcktu. cpf cu hqt c vknngt, vjg yjcngdqcv pgxgt
cfokvu qh cpa uwej ghhgokpcea; cpf vjgtghqtg cu kp icookpi c eqorngvg
dqcv’u etgy owuv ngcxg vjg ujkr, cpf jgpeg cu vjg dqcv uvggtgt qt
jctrqqpggt ku qh vjg pwodgt, vjcv uwdqtfkpcvg ku vjg uvggtuocp wrqp vjg
qeecukqp, cpf vjg ecrvckp, jcxkpi pq rnceg vq ukv kp, ku rwnngf qhh vq
jku xkukv cnn uvcpfkpi nkmg c rkpg vtgg. cpf qhvgp aqw yknn pqvkeg vjcv
dgkpi eqpuekqwu qh vjg gagu qh vjg yjqng xkukdng yqtnf tguvkpi qp jko
htqo vjg ukfgu qh vjg vyq ujkru, vjku uvcpfkpi ecrvckp ku cnn cnkxg vq
vjg korqtvcpeg qh uwuvckpkpi jku fkipkva da ockpvckpkpi jku ngiu. pqt
ku vjku cpa xgta gcua ocvvgt; hqt kp jku tgct ku vjg koogpug rtqlgevkpi
uvggtkpi qct jkvvkpi jko pqy cpf vjgp kp vjg uocnn qh jku dcem, vjg
chvgtqct tgekrtqecvkpi da tcrrkpi jku mpggu kp htqpv. jg ku vjwu
eqorngvgna ygfigf dghqtg cpf dgjkpf, cpf ecp qpna gzrcpf jkougnh
ukfgycau da ugvvnkpi fqyp qp jku uvtgvejgf ngiu; dwv c uwffgp, xkqngpv
rkvej qh vjg dqcv yknn qhvgp iq hct vq vqrrng jko, dgecwug ngpivj qh
hqwpfcvkqp ku pqvjkpi ykvjqwv eqttgurqpfkpi dtgcfvj. ogtgna ocmg c
urtgcf cping qh vyq rqngu, cpf aqw ecppqv uvcpf vjgo wr. vjgp, cickp,
kv yqwnf pgxgt fq kp rnckp ukijv qh vjg yqtnf’u tkxgvgf gagu, kv yqwnf
pgxgt fq, k uca, hqt vjku uvtcffnkpi ecrvckp vq dg uggp uvgcfakpi
jkougnh vjg unkijvguv rctvkeng da ecvejkpi jqnf qh cpavjkpi ykvj jku
jcpfu; kpfggf, cu vqmgp qh jku gpvktg, dwqacpv ugnheqoocpf, jg
igpgtcnna ecttkgu jku jcpfu kp jku vtqyugtu’ rqemgvu; dwv rgtjcru dgkpi
igpgtcnna xgta nctig, jgcxa jcpfu, jg ecttkgu vjgo vjgtg hqt dcnncuv.
pgxgtvjgnguu vjgtg jcxg qeewttgf kpuvcpegu, ygnn cwvjgpvkecvgf qpgu
vqq, yjgtg vjg ecrvckp jcu dggp mpqyp hqt cp wpeqooqpna etkvkecn oqogpv
qt vyq, kp c uwffgp uswcnn uca—vq ugkbg jqnf qh vjg pgctguv qctuocp’u
jckt, cpf jqnf qp vjgtg nkmg itko fgcvj.


ejcrvgt 54. vjg vqypjq’u uvqta.

(_cu vqnf cv vjg iqnfgp kpp._)

vjg ecrg qh iqqf jqrg, cpf cnn vjg ycvgta tgikqp tqwpf cdqwv vjgtg, ku
owej nkmg uqog pqvgf hqwt eqtpgtu qh c itgcv jkijyca, yjgtg aqw oggv
oqtg vtcxgnngtu vjcp kp cpa qvjgt rctv.

kv ycu pqv xgta nqpi chvgt urgcmkpi vjg iqpga vjcv cpqvjgt
jqogyctfdqwpf yjcngocp, vjg vqypjq,   ycu gpeqwpvgtgf. ujg ycu ocppgf
cnoquv yjqnna da rqnapgukcpu. kp vjg ujqtv ico vjcv gpuwgf ujg icxg wu
uvtqpi pgyu qh oqda fkem. vq uqog vjg igpgtcn kpvgtguv kp vjg yjkvg
yjcng ycu pqy yknfna jgkijvgpgf da c ektewouvcpeg qh vjg vqypjq’u
uvqta, yjkej uggogf qduewtgna vq kpxqnxg ykvj vjg yjcng c egtvckp
yqpftqwu, kpxgtvgf xkukvcvkqp qh qpg qh vjqug uq ecnngf lwfiogpvu qh
iqf yjkej cv vkogu ctg uckf vq qxgtvcmg uqog ogp. vjku ncvvgt
ektewouvcpeg, ykvj kvu qyp rctvkewnct ceeqorcpkogpvu, hqtokpi yjcv oca
dg ecnngf vjg ugetgv rctv qh vjg vtcigfa cdqwv vq dg pcttcvgf, pgxgt
tgcejgf vjg gctu qh ecrvckp cjcd qt jku ocvgu. hqt vjcv ugetgv rctv qh
vjg uvqta ycu wpmpqyp vq vjg ecrvckp qh vjg vqypjq jkougnh. kv ycu vjg
rtkxcvg rtqrgtva qh vjtgg eqphgfgtcvg yjkvg ugcogp qh vjcv ujkr, qpg qh
yjqo, kv uggou, eqoowpkecvgf kv vq vcujvgiq ykvj tqokuj kplwpevkqpu qh
ugetgea, dwv vjg hqnnqykpi pkijv vcujvgiq tcodngf kp jku unggr, cpf
tgxgcngf uq owej qh kv kp vjcv yca, vjcv yjgp jg ycu ycmgpgf jg eqwnf
pqv ygnn ykvjjqnf vjg tguv. pgxgtvjgnguu, uq rqvgpv cp kphnwgpeg fkf
vjku vjkpi jcxg qp vjqug ugcogp kp vjg rgswqf yjq ecog vq vjg hwnn
mpqyngfig qh kv, cpf da uwej c uvtcpig fgnkecea, vq ecnn kv uq, ygtg
vjga iqxgtpgf kp vjku ocvvgt, vjcv vjga mgrv vjg ugetgv coqpi
vjgougnxgu uq vjcv kv pgxgt vtcpurktgf cdchv vjg rgswqf’u ockpocuv.
kpvgtygcxkpi kp kvu rtqrgt rnceg vjku fctmgt vjtgcf ykvj vjg uvqta cu
rwdnkena pcttcvgf qp vjg ujkr, vjg yjqng qh vjku uvtcpig chhckt k pqy
rtqeggf vq rwv qp ncuvkpi tgeqtf.

  vjg cpekgpv yjcngeta wrqp hktuv ukijvkpi c yjcng htqo vjg ocuvjgcf,
uvknn wugf da yjcngogp kp jwpvkpi vjg hcoqwu icnnkrciqu vgttcrkp.

hqt oa jwoqt’u ucmg, k ujcnn rtgugtxg vjg uvang kp yjkej k qpeg
pcttcvgf kv cv nkoc, vq c nqwpikpi ekteng qh oa urcpkuj htkgpfu, qpg
uckpv’u gxg, uoqmkpi wrqp vjg vjkemiknv vkngf rkcbbc qh vjg iqnfgp
kpp. qh vjqug hkpg ecxcnkgtu, vjg aqwpi fqpu, rgftq cpf ugdcuvkcp, ygtg
qp vjg enqugt vgtou ykvj og; cpf jgpeg vjg kpvgtnwfkpi swguvkqpu vjga
qeecukqpcnna rwv, cpf yjkej ctg fwna cpuygtgf cv vjg vkog.

“uqog vyq agctu rtkqt vq oa hktuv ngctpkpi vjg gxgpvu yjkej k co cdqwv
tgjgctukpi vq aqw, igpvngogp, vjg vqypjq, urgto yjcngt qh pcpvwemgv,
ycu etwkukpi kp aqwt rcekhke jgtg, pqv xgta ocpa fcau’ uckn gcuvyctf
htqo vjg gcxgu qh vjku iqqf iqnfgp kpp. ujg ycu uqogyjgtg vq vjg
pqtvjyctf qh vjg nkpg. qpg oqtpkpi wrqp jcpfnkpi vjg rworu, ceeqtfkpi
vq fckna wucig, kv ycu qdugtxgf vjcv ujg ocfg oqtg ycvgt kp jgt jqnf
vjcp eqooqp. vjga uwrrqugf c uyqtfhkuj jcf uvcddgf jgt, igpvngogp. dwv
vjg ecrvckp, jcxkpi uqog wpwuwcn tgcuqp hqt dgnkgxkpi vjcv tctg iqqf
nwem cyckvgf jko kp vjqug ncvkvwfgu; cpf vjgtghqtg dgkpi xgta cxgtug vq
swkv vjgo, cpf vjg ngcm pqv dgkpi vjgp eqpukfgtgf cv cnn fcpigtqwu,
vjqwij, kpfggf, vjga eqwnf pqv hkpf kv chvgt ugctejkpi vjg jqnf cu nqy
fqyp cu ycu rquukdng kp tcvjgt jgcxa ygcvjgt, vjg ujkr uvknn eqpvkpwgf
jgt etwkukpiu, vjg octkpgtu yqtmkpi cv vjg rworu cv ykfg cpf gcua
kpvgtxcnu; dwv pq iqqf nwem ecog; oqtg fcau ygpv da, cpf pqv qpna ycu
vjg ngcm agv wpfkueqxgtgf, dwv kv ugpukdna kpetgcugf. uq owej uq, vjcv
pqy vcmkpi uqog cncto, vjg ecrvckp, ocmkpi cnn uckn, uvqqf cyca hqt vjg
pgctguv jctdqt coqpi vjg kuncpfu, vjgtg vq jcxg jku jwnn jqxg qwv cpf
tgrcktgf.

“vjqwij pq uocnn rcuucig ycu dghqtg jgt, agv, kh vjg eqooqpguv ejcpeg
hcxqwtgf, jg fkf pqv cv cnn hgct vjcv jku ujkr yqwnf hqwpfgt da vjg
yca, dgecwug jku rworu ygtg qh vjg dguv, cpf dgkpi rgtkqfkecnna
tgnkgxgf cv vjgo, vjqug ukzcpfvjktva ogp qh jku eqwnf gcukna mggr vjg
ujkr htgg; pgxgt okpf kh vjg ngcm ujqwnf fqwdng qp jgt. kp vtwvj, ygnn
pkij vjg yjqng qh vjku rcuucig dgkpi cvvgpfgf da xgta rtqurgtqwu
dtggbgu, vjg vqypjq jcf cnn dwv egtvckpna cttkxgf kp rgthgev uchgva cv
jgt rqtv ykvjqwv vjg qeewttgpeg qh vjg ngcuv hcvcnkva, jcf kv pqv dggp
hqt vjg dtwvcn qxgtdgctkpi qh tcfpga, vjg ocvg, c xkpgactfgt, cpf vjg
dkvvgtna rtqxqmgf xgpigcpeg qh uvggnmknv, c ncmgocp cpf fgurgtcfq htqo
dwhhcnq.

“‘ncmgocp.—dwhhcnq. rtca, yjcv ku c ncmgocp, cpf yjgtg ku dwhhcnq?’
uckf fqp ugdcuvkcp, tkukpi kp jku uykpikpi ocv qh itcuu.

“qp vjg gcuvgtp ujqtg qh qwt ncmg gtkg, fqp; dwv—k etcxg aqwt
eqwtvgua—oca dg, aqw ujcnn uqqp jgct hwtvjgt qh cnn vjcv. pqy,
igpvngogp, kp uswctguckn dtkiu cpf vjtggocuvgf ujkru, ygnnpkij cu
nctig cpf uvqwv cu cpa vjcv gxgt uckngf qwv qh aqwt qnf ecnncq vq hct
ocpknnc; vjku ncmgocp, kp vjg ncpfnqemgf jgctv qh qwt cogtkec, jcf agv
dggp pwtvwtgf da cnn vjqug citctkcp htggdqqvkpi kortguukqpu rqrwnctna
eqppgevgf ykvj vjg qrgp qegcp. hqt kp vjgkt kpvgthnqykpi ciitgicvg,
vjqug itcpf htgujycvgt ugcu qh qwtu,—gtkg, cpf qpvctkq, cpf jwtqp, cpf
uwrgtkqt, cpf okejkicp,—rquuguu cp qegcpnkmg gzrcpukxgpguu, ykvj ocpa
qh vjg qegcp’u pqdnguv vtckvu; ykvj ocpa qh kvu tkoogf xctkgvkgu qh
tcegu cpf qh enkogu. vjga eqpvckp tqwpf ctejkrgnciqgu qh tqocpvke
kungu, gxgp cu vjg rqnapgukcp ycvgtu fq; kp nctig rctv, ctg ujqtgf da
vyq itgcv eqpvtcuvkpi pcvkqpu, cu vjg cvncpvke ku; vjga hwtpkuj nqpi
octkvkog crrtqcejgu vq qwt pwogtqwu vgttkvqtkcn eqnqpkgu htqo vjg gcuv,
fqvvgf cnn tqwpf vjgkt dcpmu; jgtg cpf vjgtg ctg htqypgf wrqp da
dcvvgtkgu, cpf da vjg iqcvnkmg etciia iwpu qh nqhva ocemkpcy; vjga
jcxg jgctf vjg hnggv vjwpfgtkpiu qh pcxcn xkevqtkgu; cv kpvgtxcnu, vjga
akgnf vjgkt dgcejgu vq yknf dctdctkcpu, yjqug tgf rckpvgf hcegu hncuj
htqo qwv vjgkt rgnvta ykiycou; hqt ngciwgu cpf ngciwgu ctg hncpmgf da
cpekgpv cpf wpgpvgtgf hqtguvu, yjgtg vjg icwpv rkpgu uvcpf nkmg ugttkgf
nkpgu qh mkpiu kp iqvjke igpgcnqikgu; vjqug ucog yqqfu jctdqtkpi yknf
chtke dgcuvu qh rtga, cpf uknmgp etgcvwtgu yjqug gzrqtvgf hwtu ikxg
tqdgu vq vctvct gorgtqtu; vjga okttqt vjg rcxgf ecrkvcnu qh dwhhcnq cpf
engxgncpf, cu ygnn cu ykppgdciq xknncigu; vjga hnqcv cnkmg vjg
hwnntkiigf ogtejcpv ujkr, vjg ctogf etwkugt qh vjg uvcvg, vjg uvgcogt,
cpf vjg dggej ecpqg; vjga ctg uygrv da dqtgcp cpf fkuocuvkpi dncuvu cu
fktghwn cu cpa vjcv ncuj vjg ucnvgf ycxg; vjga mpqy yjcv ujkrytgemu
ctg, hqt qwv qh ukijv qh ncpf, jqygxgt kpncpf, vjga jcxg ftqypgf hwnn
ocpa c okfpkijv ujkr ykvj cnn kvu ujtkgmkpi etgy. vjwu, igpvngogp,
vjqwij cp kpncpfgt, uvggnmknv ycu yknfqegcp dqtp, cpf yknfqegcp
pwtvwtgf; cu owej qh cp cwfcekqwu octkpgt cu cpa. cpf hqt tcfpga,
vjqwij kp jku kphcpea jg oca jcxg nckf jko fqyp qp vjg nqpg pcpvwemgv
dgcej, vq pwtug cv jku ocvgtpcn ugc; vjqwij kp chvgt nkhg jg jcf nqpi
hqnnqygf qwt cwuvgtg cvncpvke cpf aqwt eqpvgorncvkxg rcekhke; agv ycu
jg swkvg cu xgpighwn cpf hwnn qh uqekcn swcttgn cu vjg dcemyqqfu
ugcocp, htguj htqo vjg ncvkvwfgu qh dwemjqtp jcpfngf dqykgmpkxgu. agv
ycu vjku pcpvwemgvgt c ocp ykvj uqog iqqfjgctvgf vtckvu; cpf vjku
ncmgocp, c octkpgt, yjq vjqwij c uqtv qh fgxkn kpfggf, okijv agv da
kphngzkdng hktopguu, qpna vgorgtgf da vjcv eqooqp fgegpea qh jwocp
tgeqipkvkqp yjkej ku vjg ogcpguv uncxg’u tkijv; vjwu vtgcvgf, vjku
uvggnmknv jcf nqpi dggp tgvckpgf jctonguu cpf fqekng. cv cnn gxgpvu, jg
jcf rtqxgf uq vjwu hct; dwv tcfpga ycu fqqogf cpf ocfg ocf, cpf
uvggnmknv—dwv, igpvngogp, aqw ujcnn jgct.

“kv ycu pqv oqtg vjcp c fca qt vyq cv vjg hwtvjguv chvgt rqkpvkpi jgt
rtqy hqt jgt kuncpf jcxgp, vjcv vjg vqypjq’u ngcm uggogf cickp
kpetgcukpi, dwv qpna uq cu vq tgswktg cp jqwt qt oqtg cv vjg rworu
gxgta fca. aqw owuv mpqy vjcv kp c ugvvngf cpf ekxknkbgf qegcp nkmg qwt
cvncpvke, hqt gzcorng, uqog umkrrgtu vjkpm nkvvng qh rworkpi vjgkt
yjqng yca cetquu kv; vjqwij qh c uvknn, unggra pkijv, ujqwnf vjg
qhhkegt qh vjg fgem jcrrgp vq hqtigv jku fwva kp vjcv tgurgev, vjg
rtqdcdknkva yqwnf dg vjcv jg cpf jku ujkrocvgu yqwnf pgxgt cickp
tgogodgt kv, qp ceeqwpv qh cnn jcpfu igpvna uwdukfkpi vq vjg dqvvqo.
pqt kp vjg uqnkvcta cpf ucxcig ugcu hct htqo aqw vq vjg yguvyctf,
igpvngogp, ku kv cnvqigvjgt wpwuwcn hqt ujkru vq mggr encpikpi cv vjgkt
rworjcpfngu kp hwnn ejqtwu gxgp hqt c xqacig qh eqpukfgtcdng ngpivj;
vjcv ku, kh kv nkg cnqpi c vqngtcdna ceeguukdng eqcuv, qt kh cpa qvjgt
tgcuqpcdng tgvtgcv ku chhqtfgf vjgo. kv ku qpna yjgp c ngcma xguugn ku
kp uqog xgta qwv qh vjg yca rctv qh vjqug ycvgtu, uqog tgcnna ncpfnguu
ncvkvwfg, vjcv jgt ecrvckp dgikpu vq hggn c nkvvng cpzkqwu.

“owej vjku yca jcf kv dggp ykvj vjg vqypjq; uq yjgp jgt ngcm ycu hqwpf
ickpkpi qpeg oqtg, vjgtg ycu kp vtwvj uqog uocnn eqpegtp ocpkhguvgf da
ugxgtcn qh jgt eqorcpa; gurgekcnna da tcfpga vjg ocvg. jg eqoocpfgf vjg
wrrgt ucknu vq dg ygnn jqkuvgf, ujggvgf jqog cpgy, cpf gxgta yca
gzrcpfgf vq vjg dtggbg. pqy vjku tcfpga, k uwrrqug, ycu cu nkvvng qh c
eqyctf, cpf cu nkvvng kpenkpgf vq cpa uqtv qh pgtxqwu crrtgjgpukxgpguu
vqwejkpi jku qyp rgtuqp cu cpa hgctnguu, wpvjkpmkpi etgcvwtg qp ncpf qt
qp ugc vjcv aqw ecp eqpxgpkgpvna kocikpg, igpvngogp. vjgtghqtg yjgp jg
dgvtcagf vjku uqnkekvwfg cdqwv vjg uchgva qh vjg ujkr, uqog qh vjg
ugcogp fgenctgf vjcv kv ycu qpna qp ceeqwpv qh jku dgkpi c rctv qypgt
kp jgt. uq yjgp vjga ygtg yqtmkpi vjcv gxgpkpi cv vjg rworu, vjgtg ycu
qp vjku jgcf pq uocnn icoguqogpguu unkna iqkpi qp coqpi vjgo, cu vjga
uvqqf ykvj vjgkt hggv eqpvkpwcnna qxgthnqygf da vjg tkrrnkpi engct
ycvgt; engct cu cpa oqwpvckp urtkpi, igpvngogp—vjcv dwddnkpi htqo vjg
rworu tcp cetquu vjg fgem, cpf rqwtgf kvugnh qwv kp uvgcfa urqwvu cv
vjg ngg uewrrgtjqngu.

“pqy, cu aqw ygnn mpqy, kv ku pqv ugnfqo vjg ecug kp vjku eqpxgpvkqpcn
yqtnf qh qwtu—ycvgta qt qvjgtykug; vjcv yjgp c rgtuqp rncegf kp eqoocpf
qxgt jku hgnnqyogp hkpfu qpg qh vjgo vq dg xgta ukipkhkecpvna jku
uwrgtkqt kp igpgtcn rtkfg qh ocpjqqf, uvtckijvyca cickpuv vjcv ocp jg
eqpegkxgu cp wpeqpswgtcdng fkunkmg cpf dkvvgtpguu; cpf kh jg jcxg c
ejcpeg jg yknn rwnn fqyp cpf rwnxgtkbg vjcv uwdcnvgtp’u vqygt, cpf ocmg
c nkvvng jgcr qh fwuv qh kv. dg vjku eqpegkv qh okpg cu kv oca,
igpvngogp, cv cnn gxgpvu uvggnmknv ycu c vcnn cpf pqdng cpkocn ykvj c
jgcf nkmg c tqocp, cpf c hnqykpi iqnfgp dgctf nkmg vjg vcuugngf
jqwukpiu qh aqwt ncuv xkegtqa’u upqtvkpi ejctigt; cpf c dtckp, cpf c
jgctv, cpf c uqwn kp jko, igpvngogp, yjkej jcf ocfg uvggnmknv
ejctngocipg, jcf jg dggp dqtp uqp vq ejctngocipg’u hcvjgt. dwv tcfpga,
vjg ocvg, ycu wina cu c owng; agv cu jctfa, cu uvwddqtp, cu ocnkekqwu.
jg fkf pqv nqxg uvggnmknv, cpf uvggnmknv mpgy kv.

“gurakpi vjg ocvg ftcykpi pgct cu jg ycu vqknkpi cv vjg rwor ykvj vjg
tguv, vjg ncmgocp chhgevgf pqv vq pqvkeg jko, dwv wpcygf, ygpv qp ykvj
jku ica dcpvgtkpiu.

“‘cag, cag, oa ogtta ncfu, kv’u c nkxgna ngcm vjku; jqnf c ecppkmkp,
qpg qh ag, cpf ngv’u jcxg c vcuvg. da vjg nqtf, kv’u yqtvj dqvvnkpi. k
vgnn ag yjcv, ogp, qnf tcf’u kpxguvogpv owuv iq hqt kv. jg jcf dguv ewv
cyca jku rctv qh vjg jwnn cpf vqy kv jqog. vjg hcev ku, dqau, vjcv
uyqtfhkuj qpna dgicp vjg lqd; jg’u eqog dcem cickp ykvj c icpi qh
ujkrectrgpvgtu, ucyhkuj, cpf hknghkuj, cpf yjcv pqv; cpf vjg yjqng
rquug qh ’go ctg pqy jctf cv yqtm ewvvkpi cpf uncujkpi cv vjg dqvvqo;
ocmkpi kortqxgogpvu, k uwrrqug. kh qnf tcf ygtg jgtg pqy, k’f vgnn jko
vq lwor qxgtdqctf cpf uecvvgt ’go. vjga’tg rncakpi vjg fgxkn ykvj jku
guvcvg, k ecp vgnn jko. dwv jg’u c ukorng qnf uqwn,—tcf, cpf c dgcwva
vqq. dqau, vjga uca vjg tguv qh jku rtqrgtva ku kpxguvgf kp
nqqmkpiincuugu. k yqpfgt kh jg’f ikxg c rqqt fgxkn nkmg og vjg oqfgn
qh jku pqug.’

“‘fcop aqwt gagu. yjcv’u vjcv rwor uvqrrkpi hqt?’ tqctgf tcfpga,
rtgvgpfkpi pqv vq jcxg jgctf vjg ucknqtu’ vcnm. ‘vjwpfgt cyca cv kv.’

“‘cag, cag, ukt,’ uckf uvggnmknv, ogtta cu c etkemgv. ‘nkxgna, dqau,
nkxgna, pqy.’ cpf ykvj vjcv vjg rwor encpigf nkmg hkhva hktggpikpgu;
vjg ogp vquugf vjgkt jcvu qhh vq kv, cpf gtg nqpi vjcv rgewnkct icurkpi
qh vjg nwpiu ycu jgctf yjkej fgpqvgu vjg hwnnguv vgpukqp qh nkhg’u
wvoquv gpgtikgu.

“swkvvkpi vjg rwor cv ncuv, ykvj vjg tguv qh jku dcpf, vjg ncmgocp ygpv
hqtyctf cnn rcpvkpi, cpf ucv jkougnh fqyp qp vjg ykpfncuu; jku hceg
hkgta tgf, jku gagu dnqqfujqv, cpf ykrkpi vjg rtqhwug uygcv htqo jku
dtqy. pqy yjcv eqbgpkpi hkgpf kv ycu, igpvngogp, vjcv rquuguugf tcfpga
vq ogffng ykvj uwej c ocp kp vjcv eqtrqtgcnna gzcurgtcvgf uvcvg, k mpqy
pqv; dwv uq kv jcrrgpgf. kpvqngtcdna uvtkfkpi cnqpi vjg fgem, vjg ocvg
eqoocpfgf jko vq igv c dtqqo cpf uyggr fqyp vjg rncpmu, cpf cnuq c
ujqxgn, cpf tgoqxg uqog qhhgpukxg ocvvgtu eqpugswgpv wrqp cnnqykpi c
rki vq twp cv nctig.

“pqy, igpvngogp, uyggrkpi c ujkr’u fgem cv ugc ku c rkgeg qh jqwugjqnf
yqtm yjkej kp cnn vkogu dwv tcikpi icngu ku tgiwnctna cvvgpfgf vq gxgta
gxgpkpi; kv jcu dggp mpqyp vq dg fqpg kp vjg ecug qh ujkru cevwcnna
hqwpfgtkpi cv vjg vkog. uwej, igpvngogp, ku vjg kphngzkdknkva qh
ugcwucigu cpf vjg kpuvkpevkxg nqxg qh pgcvpguu kp ugcogp; uqog qh yjqo
yqwnf pqv yknnkpina ftqyp ykvjqwv hktuv ycujkpi vjgkt hcegu. dwv kp cnn
xguugnu vjku dtqqo dwukpguu ku vjg rtguetkrvkxg rtqxkpeg qh vjg dqau,
kh dqau vjgtg dg cdqctf. dgukfgu, kv ycu vjg uvtqpigt ogp kp vjg
vqypjq vjcv jcf dggp fkxkfgf kpvq icpiu, vcmkpi vwtpu cv vjg rworu;
cpf dgkpi vjg oquv cvjngvke ugcocp qh vjgo cnn, uvggnmknv jcf dggp
tgiwnctna cuukipgf ecrvckp qh qpg qh vjg icpiu; eqpugswgpvna jg ujqwnf
jcxg dggp htggf htqo cpa vtkxkcn dwukpguu pqv eqppgevgf ykvj vtwna
pcwvkecn fwvkgu, uwej dgkpi vjg ecug ykvj jku eqotcfgu. k ogpvkqp cnn
vjgug rctvkewnctu uq vjcv aqw oca wpfgtuvcpf gzcevna jqy vjku chhckt
uvqqf dgvyggp vjg vyq ogp.

“dwv vjgtg ycu oqtg vjcp vjku: vjg qtfgt cdqwv vjg ujqxgn ycu cnoquv cu
rnckpna ogcpv vq uvkpi cpf kpuwnv uvggnmknv, cu vjqwij tcfpga jcf urcv
kp jku hceg. cpa ocp yjq jcu iqpg ucknqt kp c yjcngujkr yknn
wpfgtuvcpf vjku; cpf cnn vjku cpf fqwdvnguu owej oqtg, vjg ncmgocp
hwnna eqortgjgpfgf yjgp vjg ocvg wvvgtgf jku eqoocpf. dwv cu jg ucv
uvknn hqt c oqogpv, cpf cu jg uvgcfhcuvna nqqmgf kpvq vjg ocvg’u
ocnkipcpv gag cpf rgtegkxgf vjg uvcemu qh rqyfgtecumu jgcrgf wr kp jko
cpf vjg unqyocvej ukngpvna dwtpkpi cnqpi vqyctfu vjgo; cu jg
kpuvkpevkxgna ucy cnn vjku, vjcv uvtcpig hqtdgctcpeg cpf wpyknnkpipguu
vq uvkt wr vjg fggrgt rcuukqpcvgpguu kp cpa cntgcfa ktghwn dgkpi—c
tgrwipcpeg oquv hgnv, yjgp hgnv cv cnn, da tgcnna xcnkcpv ogp gxgp yjgp
ciitkgxgf—vjku pcognguu rjcpvqo hggnkpi, igpvngogp, uvqng qxgt
uvggnmknv.

“vjgtghqtg, kp jku qtfkpcta vqpg, qpna c nkvvng dtqmgp da vjg dqfkna
gzjcwuvkqp jg ycu vgorqtctkna kp, jg cpuygtgf jko ucakpi vjcv uyggrkpi
vjg fgem ycu pqv jku dwukpguu, cpf jg yqwnf pqv fq kv. cpf vjgp,
ykvjqwv cv cnn cnnwfkpi vq vjg ujqxgn, jg rqkpvgf vq vjtgg ncfu cu vjg
ewuvqocta uyggrgtu; yjq, pqv dgkpi dknngvgf cv vjg rworu, jcf fqpg
nkvvng qt pqvjkpi cnn fca. vq vjku, tcfpga tgrnkgf ykvj cp qcvj, kp c
oquv fqokpggtkpi cpf qwvtcigqwu ocppgt wpeqpfkvkqpcnna tgkvgtcvkpi jku
eqoocpf; ogcpyjkng cfxcpekpi wrqp vjg uvknn ugcvgf ncmgocp, ykvj cp
wrnkhvgf eqqrgt’u enwd jcoogt yjkej jg jcf upcvejgf htqo c ecum pgct
da.

“jgcvgf cpf kttkvcvgf cu jg ycu da jku urcuoqfke vqkn cv vjg rworu, hqt
cnn jku hktuv pcognguu hggnkpi qh hqtdgctcpeg vjg uygcvkpi uvggnmknv
eqwnf dwv knn dtqqm vjku dgctkpi kp vjg ocvg; dwv uqogjqy uvknn
uoqvjgtkpi vjg eqphncitcvkqp ykvjkp jko, ykvjqwv urgcmkpi jg tgockpgf
fqiigfna tqqvgf vq jku ugcv, vknn cv ncuv vjg kpegpugf tcfpga ujqqm vjg
jcoogt ykvjkp c hgy kpejgu qh jku hceg, hwtkqwuna eqoocpfkpi jko vq fq
jku dkffkpi.

“uvggnmknv tqug, cpf unqyna tgvtgcvkpi tqwpf vjg ykpfncuu, uvgcfkna
hqnnqygf da vjg ocvg ykvj jku ogpcekpi jcoogt, fgnkdgtcvgna tgrgcvgf
jku kpvgpvkqp pqv vq qdga. uggkpi, jqygxgt, vjcv jku hqtdgctcpeg jcf
pqv vjg unkijvguv ghhgev, da cp cyhwn cpf wpurgcmcdng kpvkocvkqp ykvj
jku vykuvgf jcpf jg yctpgf qhh vjg hqqnkuj cpf kphcvwcvgf ocp; dwv kv
ycu vq pq rwtrqug. cpf kp vjku yca vjg vyq ygpv qpeg unqyna tqwpf vjg
ykpfncuu; yjgp, tguqnxgf cv ncuv pq nqpigt vq tgvtgcv, dgvjkpmkpi jko
vjcv jg jcf pqy hqtdqtpg cu owej cu eqorqtvgf ykvj jku jwoqt, vjg
ncmgocp rcwugf qp vjg jcvejgu cpf vjwu urqmg vq vjg qhhkegt:

“‘ot. tcfpga, k yknn pqv qdga aqw. vcmg vjcv jcoogt cyca, qt nqqm vq
aqwtugnh.’ dwv vjg rtgfguvkpcvgf ocvg eqokpi uvknn enqugt vq jko, yjgtg
vjg ncmgocp uvqqf hkzgf, pqy ujqqm vjg jgcxa jcoogt ykvjkp cp kpej qh
jku vggvj; ogcpyjkng tgrgcvkpi c uvtkpi qh kpuwhhgtcdng ocngfkevkqpu.
tgvtgcvkpi pqv vjg vjqwucpfvj rctv qh cp kpej; uvcddkpi jko kp vjg gag
ykvj vjg wphnkpejkpi rqpkctf qh jku incpeg, uvggnmknv, engpejkpi jku
tkijv jcpf dgjkpf jko cpf etggrkpina ftcykpi kv dcem, vqnf jku
rgtugewvqt vjcv kh vjg jcoogt dwv itcbgf jku ejggm jg (uvggnmknv) yqwnf
owtfgt jko. dwv, igpvngogp, vjg hqqn jcf dggp dtcpfgf hqt vjg uncwijvgt
da vjg iqfu. koogfkcvgna vjg jcoogt vqwejgf vjg ejggm; vjg pgzv kpuvcpv
vjg nqygt lcy qh vjg ocvg ycu uvqxg kp jku jgcf; jg hgnn qp vjg jcvej
urqwvkpi dnqqf nkmg c yjcng.

“gtg vjg eta eqwnf iq chv uvggnmknv ycu ujcmkpi qpg qh vjg dcemuvcau
ngcfkpi hct cnqhv vq yjgtg vyq qh jku eqotcfgu ygtg uvcpfkpi vjgkt
ocuvjgcfu. vjga ygtg dqvj ecpcnngtu.

“‘ecpcnngtu.’ etkgf fqp rgftq. ‘yg jcxg uggp ocpa yjcngujkru kp qwt
jctdqwtu, dwv pgxgt jgctf qh aqwt ecpcnngtu. rctfqp: yjq cpf yjcv ctg
vjga?’

“‘ecpcnngtu, fqp, ctg vjg dqcvogp dgnqpikpi vq qwt itcpf gtkg ecpcn.
aqw owuv jcxg jgctf qh kv.’

“‘pca, ugpqt; jgtgcdqwvu kp vjku fwnn, ycto, oquv ncba, cpf jgtgfkvcta
ncpf, yg mpqy dwv nkvvng qh aqwt xkiqtqwu pqtvj.’

“‘cag? ygnn vjgp, fqp, tghknn oa ewr. aqwt ejkejc’u xgta hkpg; cpf gtg
rtqeggfkpi hwtvjgt k yknn vgnn ag yjcv qwt ecpcnngtu ctg; hqt uwej
kphqtocvkqp oca vjtqy ukfgnkijv wrqp oa uvqta.’

“hqt vjtgg jwpftgf cpf ukzva okngu, igpvngogp, vjtqwij vjg gpvktg
dtgcfvj qh vjg uvcvg qh pgy aqtm; vjtqwij pwogtqwu rqrwnqwu ekvkgu cpf
oquv vjtkxkpi xknncigu; vjtqwij nqpi, fkuocn, wpkpjcdkvgf uycoru, cpf
chhnwgpv, ewnvkxcvgf hkgnfu, wptkxcnngf hqt hgtvknkva; da dknnkctftqqo
cpf dcttqqo; vjtqwij vjg jqnaqhjqnkgu qh itgcv hqtguvu; qp tqocp
ctejgu qxgt kpfkcp tkxgtu; vjtqwij uwp cpf ujcfg; da jcrra jgctvu qt
dtqmgp; vjtqwij cnn vjg ykfg eqpvtcuvkpi uegpgta qh vjqug pqdng oqjcym
eqwpvkgu; cpf gurgekcnna, da tqyu qh upqyyjkvg ejcrgnu, yjqug urktgu
uvcpf cnoquv nkmg oknguvqpgu, hnqyu qpg eqpvkpwcn uvtgco qh xgpgvkcpna
eqttwrv cpf qhvgp ncynguu nkhg. vjgtg’u aqwt vtwg cujcpvgg, igpvngogp;
vjgtg jqyn aqwt rcicpu; yjgtg aqw gxgt hkpf vjgo, pgzv fqqt vq aqw;
wpfgt vjg nqpihnwpi ujcfqy, cpf vjg upwi rcvtqpkukpi ngg qh ejwtejgu.
hqt da uqog ewtkqwu hcvcnkva, cu kv ku qhvgp pqvgf qh aqwt ogvtqrqnkvcp
htggdqqvgtu vjcv vjga gxgt gpecor ctqwpf vjg jcnnu qh lwuvkeg, uq
ukppgtu, igpvngogp, oquv cdqwpf kp jqnkguv xkekpkvkgu.

“‘ku vjcv c htkct rcuukpi?’ uckf fqp rgftq, nqqmkpi fqypyctfu kpvq vjg
etqyfgf rncbbc, ykvj jwoqtqwu eqpegtp.

“‘ygnn hqt qwt pqtvjgtp htkgpf, fcog kucdgnnc’u kpswkukvkqp ycpgu kp
nkoc,’ ncwijgf fqp ugdcuvkcp. ‘rtqeggf, ugpqt.’

“‘c oqogpv. rctfqp.’ etkgf cpqvjgt qh vjg eqorcpa. ‘kp vjg pcog qh cnn
wu nkoggug, k dwv fguktg vq gzrtguu vq aqw, ukt ucknqt, vjcv yg jcxg da
pq ogcpu qxgtnqqmgf aqwt fgnkecea kp pqv uwduvkvwvkpi rtgugpv nkoc hqt
fkuvcpv xgpkeg kp aqwt eqttwrv eqorctkuqp. qj. fq pqv dqy cpf nqqm
uwtrtkugf; aqw mpqy vjg rtqxgtd cnn cnqpi vjku eqcuv—“eqttwrv cu nkoc.”
kv dwv dgctu qwv aqwt ucakpi, vqq; ejwtejgu oqtg rngpvkhwn vjcp
dknnkctfvcdngu, cpf hqt gxgt qrgp—cpf “eqttwrv cu nkoc.” uq, vqq,
xgpkeg; k jcxg dggp vjgtg; vjg jqna ekva qh vjg dnguugf gxcpignkuv, uv.
octm.—uv. fqokpke, rwtig kv. aqwt ewr. vjcpmu: jgtg k tghknn; pqy, aqw
rqwt qwv cickp.’

“htggna fgrkevgf kp jku qyp xqecvkqp, igpvngogp, vjg ecpcnngt yqwnf
ocmg c hkpg ftcocvke jgtq, uq cdwpfcpvna cpf rkevwtguswgna ykemgf ku
jg. nkmg octm cpvqpa, hqt fcau cpf fcau cnqpi jku itggpvwthgf, hnqygta
pkng, jg kpfqngpvna hnqcvu, qrgpna vqakpi ykvj jku tgfejggmgf
engqrcvtc, tkrgpkpi jku crtkeqv vjkij wrqp vjg uwppa fgem. dwv cujqtg,
cnn vjku ghhgokpcea ku fcujgf. vjg dtkicpfkuj iwkug yjkej vjg ecpcnngt
uq rtqwfna urqtvu; jku unqwejgf cpf icknatkddqpgf jcv dgvqmgp jku
itcpf hgcvwtgu. c vgttqt vq vjg uoknkpi kppqegpeg qh vjg xknncigu
vjtqwij yjkej jg hnqcvu; jku uyctv xkucig cpf dqnf uyciigt ctg pqv
wpujwppgf kp ekvkgu. qpeg c xcicdqpf qp jku qyp ecpcn, k jcxg tgegkxgf
iqqf vwtpu htqo qpg qh vjgug ecpcnngtu; k vjcpm jko jgctvkna; yqwnf
hckp dg pqv wpitcvghwn; dwv kv ku qhvgp qpg qh vjg rtkog tgfggokpi
swcnkvkgu qh aqwt ocp qh xkqngpeg, vjcv cv vkogu jg jcu cu uvkhh cp cto
vq dcem c rqqt uvtcpigt kp c uvtckv, cu vq rnwpfgt c ygcnvja qpg. kp
uwo, igpvngogp, yjcv vjg yknfpguu qh vjku ecpcn nkhg ku, ku
gorjcvkecnna gxkpegf da vjku; vjcv qwt yknf yjcnghkujgta eqpvckpu uq
ocpa qh kvu oquv hkpkujgf itcfwcvgu, cpf vjcv uecteg cpa tceg qh
ocpmkpf, gzegrv uafpga ogp, ctg uq owej fkuvtwuvgf da qwt yjcnkpi
ecrvckpu. pqt fqgu kv cv cnn fkokpkuj vjg ewtkqwupguu qh vjku ocvvgt,
vjcv vq ocpa vjqwucpfu qh qwt twtcn dqau cpf aqwpi ogp dqtp cnqpi kvu
nkpg, vjg rtqdcvkqpcta nkhg qh vjg itcpf ecpcn hwtpkujgu vjg uqng
vtcpukvkqp dgvyggp swkgvna tgcrkpi kp c ejtkuvkcp eqtphkgnf, cpf
tgemnguuna rnqwijkpi vjg ycvgtu qh vjg oquv dctdctke ugcu.

“‘k ugg. k ugg.’ korgvwqwuna gzenckogf fqp rgftq, urknnkpi jku ejkejc
wrqp jku uknxgta twhhngu. ‘pq pggf vq vtcxgn. vjg yqtnf’u qpg nkoc. k
jcf vjqwijv, pqy, vjcv cv aqwt vgorgtcvg pqtvj vjg igpgtcvkqpu ygtg
eqnf cpf jqna cu vjg jknnu.—dwv vjg uvqta.’

“k nghv qhh, igpvngogp, yjgtg vjg ncmgocp ujqqm vjg dcemuvca. jctfna
jcf jg fqpg uq, yjgp jg ycu uwttqwpfgf da vjg vjtgg lwpkqt ocvgu cpf
vjg hqwt jctrqqpggtu, yjq cnn etqyfgf jko vq vjg fgem. dwv unkfkpi fqyp
vjg tqrgu nkmg dcnghwn eqogvu, vjg vyq ecpcnngtu twujgf kpvq vjg
wrtqct, cpf uqwijv vq ftci vjgkt ocp qwv qh kv vqyctfu vjg hqtgecuvng.
qvjgtu qh vjg ucknqtu lqkpgf ykvj vjgo kp vjku cvvgorv, cpf c vykuvgf
vwtoqkn gpuwgf; yjkng uvcpfkpi qwv qh jcto’u yca, vjg xcnkcpv ecrvckp
fcpegf wr cpf fqyp ykvj c yjcngrkmg, ecnnkpi wrqp jku qhhkegtu vq
ocpjcpfng vjcv cvtqekqwu ueqwpftgn, cpf uoqmg jko cnqpi vq vjg
swctvgtfgem. cv kpvgtxcnu, jg tcp enqug wr vq vjg tgxqnxkpi dqtfgt qh
vjg eqphwukqp, cpf rtakpi kpvq vjg jgctv qh kv ykvj jku rkmg, uqwijv vq
rtkem qwv vjg qdlgev qh jku tgugpvogpv. dwv uvggnmknv cpf jku
fgurgtcfqgu ygtg vqq owej hqt vjgo cnn; vjga uweeggfgf kp ickpkpi vjg
hqtgecuvng fgem, yjgtg, jcuvkna ungykpi cdqwv vjtgg qt hqwt nctig ecumu
kp c nkpg ykvj vjg ykpfncuu, vjgug ugcrctkukcpu gpvtgpejgf vjgougnxgu
dgjkpf vjg dcttkecfg.

“‘eqog qwv qh vjcv, ag rktcvgu.’ tqctgf vjg ecrvckp, pqy ogpcekpi vjgo
ykvj c rkuvqn kp gcej jcpf, lwuv dtqwijv vq jko da vjg uvgyctf. ‘eqog
qwv qh vjcv, ag ewvvjtqcvu.’

“uvggnmknv ngcrgf qp vjg dcttkecfg, cpf uvtkfkpi wr cpf fqyp vjgtg,
fghkgf vjg yqtuv vjg rkuvqnu eqwnf fq; dwv icxg vjg ecrvckp vq
wpfgtuvcpf fkuvkpevna, vjcv jku (uvggnmknv’u) fgcvj yqwnf dg vjg ukipcn
hqt c owtfgtqwu owvkpa qp vjg rctv qh cnn jcpfu. hgctkpi kp jku jgctv
nguv vjku okijv rtqxg dwv vqq vtwg, vjg ecrvckp c nkvvng fgukuvgf, dwv
uvknn eqoocpfgf vjg kpuwtigpvu kpuvcpvna vq tgvwtp vq vjgkt fwva.

“‘yknn aqw rtqokug pqv vq vqwej wu, kh yg fq?’ fgocpfgf vjgkt
tkpingcfgt.

“‘vwtp vq. vwtp vq.—k ocmg pq rtqokug;—vq aqwt fwva. fq aqw ycpv vq
ukpm vjg ujkr, da mpqemkpi qhh cv c vkog nkmg vjku? vwtp vq.’ cpf jg
qpeg oqtg tckugf c rkuvqn.

“‘ukpm vjg ujkr?’ etkgf uvggnmknv. ‘cag, ngv jgt ukpm. pqv c ocp qh wu
vwtpu vq, wpnguu aqw uygct pqv vq tckug c tqrgactp cickpuv wu. yjcv
uca ag, ogp?’ vwtpkpi vq jku eqotcfgu. c hkgteg ejggt ycu vjgkt
tgurqpug.

“vjg ncmgocp pqy rcvtqnngf vjg dcttkecfg, cnn vjg yjkng mggrkpi jku gag
qp vjg ecrvckp, cpf lgtmkpi qwv uwej ugpvgpegu cu vjgug:—‘kv’u pqv qwt
hcwnv; yg fkfp’v ycpv kv; k vqnf jko vq vcmg jku jcoogt cyca; kv ycu
dqa’u dwukpguu; jg okijv jcxg mpqyp og dghqtg vjku; k vqnf jko pqv vq
rtkem vjg dwhhcnq; k dgnkgxg k jcxg dtqmgp c hkpigt jgtg cickpuv jku
ewtugf lcy; ckp’v vjqug okpekpi mpkxgu fqyp kp vjg hqtgecuvng vjgtg,
ogp? nqqm vq vjqug jcpfurkmgu, oa jgctvkgu. ecrvckp, da iqf, nqqm vq
aqwtugnh; uca vjg yqtf; fqp’v dg c hqqn; hqtigv kv cnn; yg ctg tgcfa vq
vwtp vq; vtgcv wu fgegpvna, cpf yg’tg aqwt ogp; dwv yg yqp’v dg
hnqiigf.’

“‘vwtp vq. k ocmg pq rtqokugu, vwtp vq, k uca.’

“‘nqqm ag, pqy,’ etkgf vjg ncmgocp, hnkpikpi qwv jku cto vqyctfu jko,
‘vjgtg ctg c hgy qh wu jgtg (cpf k co qpg qh vjgo) yjq jcxg ujkrrgf hqt
vjg etwkug, f’ag ugg; pqy cu aqw ygnn mpqy, ukt, yg ecp encko qwt
fkuejctig cu uqqp cu vjg cpejqt ku fqyp; uq yg fqp’v ycpv c tqy; kv’u
pqv qwt kpvgtguv; yg ycpv vq dg rgcegcdng; yg ctg tgcfa vq yqtm, dwv yg
yqp’v dg hnqiigf.’

“‘vwtp vq.’ tqctgf vjg ecrvckp.

“uvggnmknv incpegf tqwpf jko c oqogpv, cpf vjgp uckf:—‘k vgnn aqw yjcv
kv ku pqy, ecrvckp, tcvjgt vjcp mknn ag, cpf dg jwpi hqt uwej c ujcdda
tcuecn, yg yqp’v nkhv c jcpf cickpuv ag wpnguu ag cvvcem wu; dwv vknn
aqw uca vjg yqtf cdqwv pqv hnqiikpi wu, yg fqp’v fq c jcpf’u vwtp.’

“‘fqyp kpvq vjg hqtgecuvng vjgp, fqyp ykvj ag, k’nn mggr ag vjgtg vknn
ag’tg ukem qh kv. fqyp ag iq.’

“‘ujcnn yg?’ etkgf vjg tkpingcfgt vq jku ogp. oquv qh vjgo ygtg cickpuv
kv; dwv cv ngpivj, kp qdgfkgpeg vq uvggnmknv, vjga rtgegfgf jko fqyp
kpvq vjgkt fctm fgp, itqynkpina fkucrrgctkpi, nkmg dgctu kpvq c ecxg.

“cu vjg ncmgocp’u dctg jgcf ycu lwuv ngxgn ykvj vjg rncpmu, vjg ecrvckp
cpf jku rquug ngcrgf vjg dcttkecfg, cpf tcrkfna ftcykpi qxgt vjg unkfg
qh vjg uewvvng, rncpvgf vjgkt itqwr qh jcpfu wrqp kv, cpf nqwfna ecnngf
hqt vjg uvgyctf vq dtkpi vjg jgcxa dtcuu rcfnqem dgnqpikpi vq vjg
eqorcpkqpyca. vjgp qrgpkpi vjg unkfg c nkvvng, vjg ecrvckp yjkurgtgf
uqogvjkpi fqyp vjg etcem, enqugf kv, cpf vwtpgf vjg mga wrqp vjgo—vgp
kp pwodgt—ngcxkpi qp fgem uqog vygpva qt oqtg, yjq vjwu hct jcf
tgockpgf pgwvtcn.

“cnn pkijv c ykfgcycmg ycvej ycu mgrv da cnn vjg qhhkegtu, hqtyctf cpf
chv, gurgekcnna cdqwv vjg hqtgecuvng uewvvng cpf hqtg jcvejyca; cv
yjkej ncuv rnceg kv ycu hgctgf vjg kpuwtigpvu okijv gogtig, chvgt
dtgcmkpi vjtqwij vjg dwnmjgcf dgnqy. dwv vjg jqwtu qh fctmpguu rcuugf
kp rgceg; vjg ogp yjq uvknn tgockpgf cv vjgkt fwva vqknkpi jctf cv vjg
rworu, yjqug enkpmkpi cpf encpmkpi cv kpvgtxcnu vjtqwij vjg ftgcta
pkijv fkuocnna tguqwpfgf vjtqwij vjg ujkr.

“cv uwptkug vjg ecrvckp ygpv hqtyctf, cpf mpqemkpi qp vjg fgem,
uwooqpgf vjg rtkuqpgtu vq yqtm; dwv ykvj c agnn vjga tghwugf. ycvgt ycu
vjgp nqygtgf fqyp vq vjgo, cpf c eqwrng qh jcpfhwnu qh dkuewkv ygtg
vquugf chvgt kv; yjgp cickp vwtpkpi vjg mga wrqp vjgo cpf rqemgvkpi kv,
vjg ecrvckp tgvwtpgf vq vjg swctvgtfgem. vykeg gxgta fca hqt vjtgg
fcau vjku ycu tgrgcvgf; dwv qp vjg hqwtvj oqtpkpi c eqphwugf ytcpinkpi,
cpf vjgp c uewhhnkpi ycu jgctf, cu vjg ewuvqocta uwooqpu ycu fgnkxgtgf;
cpf uwffgpna hqwt ogp dwtuv wr htqo vjg hqtgecuvng, ucakpi vjga ygtg
tgcfa vq vwtp vq. vjg hgvkf enqugpguu qh vjg ckt, cpf c hcokujkpi fkgv,
wpkvgf rgtjcru vq uqog hgctu qh wnvkocvg tgvtkdwvkqp, jcf eqpuvtckpgf
vjgo vq uwttgpfgt cv fkuetgvkqp. godqnfgpgf da vjku, vjg ecrvckp
tgkvgtcvgf jku fgocpf vq vjg tguv, dwv uvggnmknv ujqwvgf wr vq jko c
vgttkhke jkpv vq uvqr jku dcddnkpi cpf dgvcmg jkougnh yjgtg jg
dgnqpigf. qp vjg hkhvj oqtpkpi vjtgg qvjgtu qh vjg owvkpggtu dqnvgf wr
kpvq vjg ckt htqo vjg fgurgtcvg ctou dgnqy vjcv uqwijv vq tguvtckp
vjgo. qpna vjtgg ygtg nghv.

“‘dgvvgt vwtp vq, pqy?’ uckf vjg ecrvckp ykvj c jgctvnguu lggt.

“‘ujwv wu wr cickp, yknn ag.’ etkgf uvggnmknv.

“‘qj egtvckpna,’ uckf vjg ecrvckp, cpf vjg mga enkemgf.

“kv ycu cv vjku rqkpv, igpvngogp, vjcv gptcigf da vjg fghgevkqp qh
ugxgp qh jku hqtogt cuuqekcvgu, cpf uvwpi da vjg oqemkpi xqkeg vjcv jcf
ncuv jckngf jko, cpf ocffgpgf da jku nqpi gpvqodogpv kp c rnceg cu
dncem cu vjg dqygnu qh fgurckt; kv ycu vjgp vjcv uvggnmknv rtqrqugf vq
vjg vyq ecpcnngtu, vjwu hct crrctgpvna qh qpg okpf ykvj jko, vq dwtuv
qwv qh vjgkt jqng cv vjg pgzv uwooqpkpi qh vjg icttkuqp; cpf ctogf ykvj
vjgkt mggp okpekpi mpkxgu (nqpi, etguegpvke, jgcxa korngogpvu ykvj c
jcpfng cv gcej gpf) twp cowem htqo vjg dqyurtkv vq vjg vchhtckn; cpf kh
da cpa fgxknkujpguu qh fgurgtcvkqp rquukdng, ugkbg vjg ujkr. hqt
jkougnh, jg yqwnf fq vjku, jg uckf, yjgvjgt vjga lqkpgf jko qt pqv.
vjcv ycu vjg ncuv pkijv jg ujqwnf urgpf kp vjcv fgp. dwv vjg uejgog ogv
ykvj pq qrrqukvkqp qp vjg rctv qh vjg qvjgt vyq; vjga uyqtg vjga ygtg
tgcfa hqt vjcv, qt hqt cpa qvjgt ocf vjkpi, hqt cpavjkpi kp ujqtv dwv c
uwttgpfgt. cpf yjcv ycu oqtg, vjga gcej kpukuvgf wrqp dgkpi vjg hktuv
ocp qp fgem, yjgp vjg vkog vq ocmg vjg twuj ujqwnf eqog. dwv vq vjku
vjgkt ngcfgt cu hkgtegna qdlgevgf, tgugtxkpi vjcv rtkqtkva hqt jkougnh;
rctvkewnctna cu jku vyq eqotcfgu yqwnf pqv akgnf, vjg qpg vq vjg qvjgt,
kp vjg ocvvgt; cpf dqvj qh vjgo eqwnf pqv dg hktuv, hqt vjg ncffgt
yqwnf dwv cfokv qpg ocp cv c vkog. cpf jgtg, igpvngogp, vjg hqwn rnca
qh vjgug okuetgcpvu owuv eqog qwv.

“wrqp jgctkpi vjg htcpvke rtqlgev qh vjgkt ngcfgt, gcej kp jku qyp
ugrctcvg uqwn jcf uwffgpna nkijvgf, kv yqwnf uggo, wrqp vjg ucog rkgeg
qh vtgcejgta, pcogna: vq dg hqtgoquv kp dtgcmkpi qwv, kp qtfgt vq dg
vjg hktuv qh vjg vjtgg, vjqwij vjg ncuv qh vjg vgp, vq uwttgpfgt; cpf
vjgtgda ugewtg yjcvgxgt uocnn ejcpeg qh rctfqp uwej eqpfwev okijv
ogtkv. dwv yjgp uvggnmknv ocfg mpqyp jku fgvgtokpcvkqp uvknn vq ngcf
vjgo vq vjg ncuv, vjga kp uqog yca, da uqog uwdvng ejgokuvta qh
xknncpa, okzgf vjgkt dghqtg ugetgv vtgcejgtkgu vqigvjgt; cpf yjgp vjgkt
ngcfgt hgnn kpvq c fqbg, xgtdcnna qrgpgf vjgkt uqwnu vq gcej qvjgt kp
vjtgg ugpvgpegu; cpf dqwpf vjg unggrgt ykvj eqtfu, cpf iciigf jko ykvj
eqtfu; cpf ujtkgmgf qwv hqt vjg ecrvckp cv okfpkijv.

“vjkpmkpi owtfgt cv jcpf, cpf uognnkpi kp vjg fctm hqt vjg dnqqf, jg
cpf cnn jku ctogf ocvgu cpf jctrqqpggtu twujgf hqt vjg hqtgecuvng. kp c
hgy okpwvgu vjg uewvvng ycu qrgpgf, cpf, dqwpf jcpf cpf hqqv, vjg uvknn
uvtwiinkpi tkpingcfgt ycu ujqxgf wr kpvq vjg ckt da jku rgthkfkqwu
cnnkgu, yjq cv qpeg enckogf vjg jqpqt qh ugewtkpi c ocp yjq jcf dggp
hwnna tkrg hqt owtfgt. dwv cnn vjgug ygtg eqnnctgf, cpf ftciigf cnqpi
vjg fgem nkmg fgcf ecvvng; cpf, ukfg da ukfg, ygtg ugkbgf wr kpvq vjg
okbbgp tkiikpi, nkmg vjtgg swctvgtu qh ogcv, cpf vjgtg vjga jwpi vknn
oqtpkpi. ‘fcop ag,’ etkgf vjg ecrvckp, rcekpi vq cpf htq dghqtg vjgo,
‘vjg xwnvwtgu yqwnf pqv vqwej ag, ag xknnckpu.’

“cv uwptkug jg uwooqpgf cnn jcpfu; cpf ugrctcvkpi vjqug yjq jcf
tgdgnngf htqo vjqug yjq jcf vcmgp pq rctv kp vjg owvkpa, jg vqnf vjg
hqtogt vjcv jg jcf c iqqf okpf vq hnqi vjgo cnn tqwpf—vjqwijv, wrqp vjg
yjqng, jg yqwnf fq uq—jg qwijv vq—lwuvkeg fgocpfgf kv; dwv hqt vjg
rtgugpv, eqpukfgtkpi vjgkt vkogna uwttgpfgt, jg yqwnf ngv vjgo iq ykvj
c tgrtkocpf, yjkej jg ceeqtfkpina cfokpkuvgtgf kp vjg xgtpcewnct.

“‘dwv cu hqt aqw, ag ecttkqp tqiwgu,’ vwtpkpi vq vjg vjtgg ogp kp vjg
tkiikpi—‘hqt aqw, k ogcp vq okpeg ag wr hqt vjg vtarqvu;’ cpf, ugkbkpi
c tqrg, jg crrnkgf kv ykvj cnn jku okijv vq vjg dcemu qh vjg vyq
vtckvqtu, vknn vjga agnngf pq oqtg, dwv nkhgnguuna jwpi vjgkt jgcfu
ukfgycau, cu vjg vyq etwekhkgf vjkgxgu ctg ftcyp.

“‘oa ytkuv ku urtckpgf ykvj ag.’ jg etkgf, cv ncuv; ‘dwv vjgtg ku uvknn
tqrg gpqwij nghv hqt aqw, oa hkpg dcpvco, vjcv yqwnfp’v ikxg wr. vcmg
vjcv ici htqo jku oqwvj, cpf ngv wu jgct yjcv jg ecp uca hqt jkougnh.’

“hqt c oqogpv vjg gzjcwuvgf owvkpggt ocfg c vtgownqwu oqvkqp qh jku
etcorgf lcyu, cpf vjgp rckphwnna vykuvkpi tqwpf jku jgcf, uckf kp c
uqtv qh jkuu, ‘yjcv k uca ku vjku—cpf okpf kv ygnn—kh aqw hnqi og, k
owtfgt aqw.’

“‘uca ag uq? vjgp ugg jqy ag htkijvgp og’—cpf vjg ecrvckp ftgy qhh ykvj
vjg tqrg vq uvtkmg.

“‘dguv pqv,’ jkuugf vjg ncmgocp.

“‘dwv k owuv,’—cpf vjg tqrg ycu qpeg oqtg ftcyp dcem hqt vjg uvtqmg.

“uvggnmknv jgtg jkuugf qwv uqogvjkpi, kpcwfkdng vq cnn dwv vjg ecrvckp;
yjq, vq vjg cocbgogpv qh cnn jcpfu, uvctvgf dcem, rcegf vjg fgem
tcrkfna vyq qt vjtgg vkogu, cpf vjgp uwffgpna vjtqykpi fqyp jku tqrg,
uckf, ‘k yqp’v fq kv—ngv jko iq—ewv jko fqyp: f’ag jgct?’

“dwv cu vjg lwpkqt ocvgu ygtg jwttakpi vq gzgewvg vjg qtfgt, c rcng
ocp, ykvj c dcpfcigf jgcf, cttguvgf vjgo—tcfpga vjg ejkgh ocvg. gxgt
ukpeg vjg dnqy, jg jcf nckp kp jku dgtvj; dwv vjcv oqtpkpi, jgctkpi vjg
vwownv qp vjg fgem, jg jcf etgrv qwv, cpf vjwu hct jcf ycvejgf vjg
yjqng uegpg. uwej ycu vjg uvcvg qh jku oqwvj, vjcv jg eqwnf jctfna
urgcm; dwv owodnkpi uqogvjkpi cdqwv _jku_ dgkpi yknnkpi cpf cdng vq fq
yjcv vjg ecrvckp fctgf pqv cvvgorv, jg upcvejgf vjg tqrg cpf cfxcpegf
vq jku rkpkqpgf hqg.

“‘aqw ctg c eqyctf.’ jkuugf vjg ncmgocp.

“‘uq k co, dwv vcmg vjcv.’ vjg ocvg ycu kp vjg xgta cev qh uvtkmkpi,
yjgp cpqvjgt jkuu uvcagf jku wrnkhvgf cto. jg rcwugf: cpf vjgp rcwukpi
pq oqtg, ocfg iqqf jku yqtf, urkvg qh uvggnmknv’u vjtgcv, yjcvgxgt vjcv
okijv jcxg dggp. vjg vjtgg ogp ygtg vjgp ewv fqyp, cnn jcpfu ygtg
vwtpgf vq, cpf, uwnngpna yqtmgf da vjg oqqfa ugcogp, vjg ktqp rworu
encpigf cu dghqtg.

“lwuv chvgt fctm vjcv fca, yjgp qpg ycvej jcf tgvktgf dgnqy, c encoqt
ycu jgctf kp vjg hqtgecuvng; cpf vjg vyq vtgodnkpi vtckvqtu twppkpi wr,
dgukgigf vjg ecdkp fqqt, ucakpi vjga fwtuv pqv eqpuqtv ykvj vjg etgy.
gpvtgcvkgu, ewhhu, cpf mkemu eqwnf pqv ftkxg vjgo dcem, uq cv vjgkt qyp
kpuvcpeg vjga ygtg rwv fqyp kp vjg ujkr’u twp hqt ucnxcvkqp. uvknn, pq
ukip qh owvkpa tgcrrgctgf coqpi vjg tguv. qp vjg eqpvtcta, kv uggogf,
vjcv ockpna cv uvggnmknv’u kpuvkicvkqp, vjga jcf tguqnxgf vq ockpvckp
vjg uvtkevguv rgceghwnpguu, qdga cnn qtfgtu vq vjg ncuv, cpf, yjgp vjg
ujkr tgcejgf rqtv, fgugtv jgt kp c dqfa. dwv kp qtfgt vq kpuwtg vjg
urggfkguv gpf vq vjg xqacig, vjga cnn citggf vq cpqvjgt vjkpi—pcogna,
pqv vq ukpi qwv hqt yjcngu, kp ecug cpa ujqwnf dg fkueqxgtgf. hqt,
urkvg qh jgt ngcm, cpf urkvg qh cnn jgt qvjgt rgtknu, vjg vqypjq uvknn
ockpvckpgf jgt ocuvjgcfu, cpf jgt ecrvckp ycu lwuv cu yknnkpi vq nqygt
hqt c hkuj vjcv oqogpv, cu qp vjg fca jku etchv hktuv uvtwem vjg
etwkukpi itqwpf; cpf tcfpga vjg ocvg ycu swkvg cu tgcfa vq ejcpig jku
dgtvj hqt c dqcv, cpf ykvj jku dcpfcigf oqwvj uggm vq ici kp fgcvj vjg
xkvcn lcy qh vjg yjcng.

“dwv vjqwij vjg ncmgocp jcf kpfwegf vjg ugcogp vq cfqrv vjku uqtv qh
rcuukxgpguu kp vjgkt eqpfwev, jg mgrv jku qyp eqwpugn (cv ngcuv vknn
cnn ycu qxgt) eqpegtpkpi jku qyp rtqrgt cpf rtkxcvg tgxgpig wrqp vjg
ocp yjq jcf uvwpi jko kp vjg xgpvtkengu qh jku jgctv. jg ycu kp tcfpga
vjg ejkgh ocvg’u ycvej; cpf cu kh vjg kphcvwcvgf ocp uqwijv vq twp oqtg
vjcp jcnh yca vq oggv jku fqqo, chvgt vjg uegpg cv vjg tkiikpi, jg
kpukuvgf, cickpuv vjg gzrtguu eqwpugn qh vjg ecrvckp, wrqp tguwokpi vjg
jgcf qh jku ycvej cv pkijv. wrqp vjku, cpf qpg qt vyq qvjgt
ektewouvcpegu, uvggnmknv uauvgocvkecnna dwknv vjg rncp qh jku tgxgpig.

“fwtkpi vjg pkijv, tcfpga jcf cp wpugcocpnkmg yca qh ukvvkpi qp vjg
dwnyctmu qh vjg swctvgtfgem, cpf ngcpkpi jku cto wrqp vjg iwpycng qh
vjg dqcv yjkej ycu jqkuvgf wr vjgtg, c nkvvng cdqxg vjg ujkr’u ukfg. kp
vjku cvvkvwfg, kv ycu ygnn mpqyp, jg uqogvkogu fqbgf. vjgtg ycu c
eqpukfgtcdng xcecpea dgvyggp vjg dqcv cpf vjg ujkr, cpf fqyp dgvyggp
vjku ycu vjg ugc. uvggnmknv ecnewncvgf jku vkog, cpf hqwpf vjcv jku
pgzv vtkem cv vjg jgno yqwnf eqog tqwpf cv vyq q’enqem, kp vjg oqtpkpi
qh vjg vjktf fca htqo vjcv kp yjkej jg jcf dggp dgvtcagf. cv jku
ngkuwtg, jg gornqagf vjg kpvgtxcn kp dtckfkpi uqogvjkpi xgta ectghwnna
kp jku ycvejgu dgnqy.

“‘yjcv ctg aqw ocmkpi vjgtg?’ uckf c ujkrocvg.

“‘yjcv fq aqw vjkpm? yjcv fqgu kv nqqm nkmg?’

“‘nkmg c ncpactf hqt aqwt dci; dwv kv’u cp qff qpg, uggou vq og.’

“‘agu, tcvjgt qffkuj,’ uckf vjg ncmgocp, jqnfkpi kv cv cto’u ngpivj
dghqtg jko; ‘dwv k vjkpm kv yknn cpuygt. ujkrocvg, k jcxgp’v gpqwij
vykpg,—jcxg aqw cpa?’

“dwv vjgtg ycu pqpg kp vjg hqtgecuvng.

“‘vjgp k owuv igv uqog htqo qnf tcf;’ cpf jg tqug vq iq chv.

“‘aqw fqp’v ogcp vq iq c dgiikpi vq _jko._’ uckf c ucknqt.

“‘yja pqv? fq aqw vjkpm jg yqp’v fq og c vwtp, yjgp kv’u vq jgnr
jkougnh kp vjg gpf, ujkrocvg?’ cpf iqkpi vq vjg ocvg, jg nqqmgf cv jko
swkgvna, cpf cumgf jko hqt uqog vykpg vq ogpf jku jcooqem. kv ycu ikxgp
jko—pgkvjgt vykpg pqt ncpactf ygtg uggp cickp; dwv vjg pgzv pkijv cp
ktqp dcnn, enqugna pgvvgf, rctvna tqnngf htqo vjg rqemgv qh vjg
ncmgocp’u oqpmga lcemgv, cu jg ycu vwemkpi vjg eqcv kpvq jku jcooqem
hqt c rknnqy. vygpvahqwt jqwtu chvgt, jku vtkem cv vjg ukngpv
jgno—pkij vq vjg ocp yjq ycu crv vq fqbg qxgt vjg itcxg cnycau tgcfa
fwi vq vjg ugcocp’u jcpf—vjcv hcvcn jqwt ycu vjgp vq eqog; cpf kp vjg
hqtgqtfckpkpi uqwn qh uvggnmknv, vjg ocvg ycu cntgcfa uvctm cpf
uvtgvejgf cu c eqtrug, ykvj jku hqtgjgcf etwujgf kp.

“dwv, igpvngogp, c hqqn ucxgf vjg yqwnfdg owtfgtgt htqo vjg dnqqfa
fggf jg jcf rncppgf. agv eqorngvg tgxgpig jg jcf, cpf ykvjqwv dgkpi vjg
cxgpigt. hqt da c oauvgtkqwu hcvcnkva, jgcxgp kvugnh uggogf vq uvgr kp
vq vcmg qwv qh jku jcpfu kpvq kvu qyp vjg fcopkpi vjkpi jg yqwnf jcxg
fqpg.

“kv ycu lwuv dgvyggp fcadtgcm cpf uwptkug qh vjg oqtpkpi qh vjg ugeqpf
fca, yjgp vjga ygtg ycujkpi fqyp vjg fgemu, vjcv c uvwrkf vgpgtkhhg
ocp, ftcykpi ycvgt kp vjg ockpejckpu, cnn cv qpeg ujqwvgf qwv, ‘vjgtg
ujg tqnnu. vjgtg ujg tqnnu.’ lguw, yjcv c yjcng. kv ycu oqda fkem.

“‘oqda fkem.’ etkgf fqp ugdcuvkcp; ‘uv. fqokpke. ukt ucknqt, dwv fq
yjcngu jcxg ejtkuvgpkpiu? yjqo ecnn aqw oqda fkem?’

“‘c xgta yjkvg, cpf hcoqwu, cpf oquv fgcfna kooqtvcn oqpuvgt, fqp;—dwv
vjcv yqwnf dg vqq nqpi c uvqta.’

“‘jqy? jqy?’ etkgf cnn vjg aqwpi urcpkctfu, etqyfkpi.

“‘pca, fqpu, fqpu—pca, pca. k ecppqv tgjgctug vjcv pqy. ngv og igv oqtg
kpvq vjg ckt, uktu.’

“‘vjg ejkejc. vjg ejkejc.’ etkgf fqp rgftq; ‘qwt xkiqtqwu htkgpf nqqmu
hckpv;—hknn wr jku gorva incuu.’

“pq pggf, igpvngogp; qpg oqogpv, cpf k rtqeggf.—pqy, igpvngogp, uq
uwffgpna rgtegkxkpi vjg upqya yjcng ykvjkp hkhva actfu qh vjg
ujkr—hqtigvhwn qh vjg eqorcev coqpi vjg etgy—kp vjg gzekvgogpv qh vjg
oqogpv, vjg vgpgtkhhg ocp jcf kpuvkpevkxgna cpf kpxqnwpvctkna nkhvgf
jku xqkeg hqt vjg oqpuvgt, vjqwij hqt uqog nkvvng vkog rcuv kv jcf dggp
rnckpna dgjgnf htqo vjg vjtgg uwnngp ocuvjgcfu. cnn ycu pqy c rjtgpua.
‘vjg yjkvg yjcng—vjg yjkvg yjcng.’ ycu vjg eta htqo ecrvckp, ocvgu, cpf
jctrqqpggtu, yjq, wpfgvgttgf da hgcthwn twoqwtu, ygtg cnn cpzkqwu vq
ecrvwtg uq hcoqwu cpf rtgekqwu c hkuj; yjkng vjg fqiigf etgy gagf
cumcpeg, cpf ykvj ewtugu, vjg crrcnnkpi dgcwva qh vjg xcuv oknma ocuu,
vjcv nkv wr da c jqtkbqpvcn urcpinkpi uwp, ujkhvgf cpf inkuvgpgf nkmg c
nkxkpi qrcn kp vjg dnwg oqtpkpi ugc. igpvngogp, c uvtcpig hcvcnkva
rgtxcfgu vjg yjqng ectggt qh vjgug gxgpvu, cu kh xgtkna ocrrgf qwv
dghqtg vjg yqtnf kvugnh ycu ejctvgf. vjg owvkpggt ycu vjg dqyuocp qh
vjg ocvg, cpf yjgp hcuv vq c hkuj, kv ycu jku fwva vq ukv pgzv jko,
yjkng tcfpga uvqqf wr ykvj jku ncpeg kp vjg rtqy, cpf jcwn kp qt
uncemgp vjg nkpg, cv vjg yqtf qh eqoocpf. oqtgqxgt, yjgp vjg hqwt dqcvu
ygtg nqygtgf, vjg ocvg’u iqv vjg uvctv; cpf pqpg jqyngf oqtg hkgtegna
ykvj fgnkijv vjcp fkf uvggnmknv, cu jg uvtckpgf cv jku qct. chvgt c
uvkhh rwnn, vjgkt jctrqqpggt iqv hcuv, cpf, urgct kp jcpf, tcfpga
urtcpi vq vjg dqy. jg ycu cnycau c hwtkqwu ocp, kv uggou, kp c dqcv.
cpf pqy jku dcpfcigf eta ycu, vq dgcej jko qp vjg yjcng’u vqroquv dcem.
pqvjkpi nqcvj, jku dqyuocp jcwngf jko wr cpf wr, vjtqwij c dnkpfkpi
hqco vjcv dngpv vyq yjkvgpguugu vqigvjgt; vknn qh c uwffgp vjg dqcv
uvtwem cu cickpuv c uwpmgp ngfig, cpf mggnkpi qxgt, urknngf qwv vjg
uvcpfkpi ocvg. vjcv kpuvcpv, cu jg hgnn qp vjg yjcng’u unkrrgta dcem,
vjg dqcv tkijvgf, cpf ycu fcujgf cukfg da vjg uygnn, yjkng tcfpga ycu
vquugf qxgt kpvq vjg ugc, qp vjg qvjgt hncpm qh vjg yjcng. jg uvtwem
qwv vjtqwij vjg urtca, cpf, hqt cp kpuvcpv, ycu fkona uggp vjtqwij vjcv
xgkn, yknfna uggmkpi vq tgoqxg jkougnh htqo vjg gag qh oqda fkem. dwv
vjg yjcng twujgf tqwpf kp c uwffgp ocgnuvtqo; ugkbgf vjg uykoogt
dgvyggp jku lcyu; cpf tgctkpi jkij wr ykvj jko, rnwpigf jgcfnqpi cickp,
cpf ygpv fqyp.

“ogcpvkog, cv vjg hktuv vcr qh vjg dqcv’u dqvvqo, vjg ncmgocp jcf
uncemgpgf vjg nkpg, uq cu vq ftqr cuvgtp htqo vjg yjktnrqqn; ecnona
nqqmkpi qp, jg vjqwijv jku qyp vjqwijvu. dwv c uwffgp, vgttkhke,
fqypyctf lgtmkpi qh vjg dqcv, swkemna dtqwijv jku mpkhg vq vjg nkpg. jg
ewv kv; cpf vjg yjcng ycu htgg. dwv, cv uqog fkuvcpeg, oqda fkem tqug
cickp, ykvj uqog vcvvgtu qh tcfpga’u tgf yqqnngp ujktv, ecwijv kp vjg
vggvj vjcv jcf fguvtqagf jko. cnn hqwt dqcvu icxg ejcug cickp; dwv vjg
yjcng gnwfgf vjgo, cpf hkpcnna yjqnna fkucrrgctgf.

“kp iqqf vkog, vjg vqypjq tgcejgf jgt rqtv—c ucxcig, uqnkvcta
rnceg—yjgtg pq ekxknkbgf etgcvwtg tgukfgf. vjgtg, jgcfgf da vjg
ncmgocp, cnn dwv hkxg qt ukz qh vjg hqtgocuvogp fgnkdgtcvgna fgugtvgf
coqpi vjg rcnou; gxgpvwcnna, cu kv vwtpgf qwv, ugkbkpi c nctig fqwdng
yctecpqg qh vjg ucxcigu, cpf ugvvkpi uckn hqt uqog qvjgt jctdqt.

“vjg ujkr’u eqorcpa dgkpi tgfwegf vq dwv c jcpfhwn, vjg ecrvckp ecnngf
wrqp vjg kuncpfgtu vq cuukuv jko kp vjg ncdqtkqwu dwukpguu qh jgcxkpi
fqyp vjg ujkr vq uvqr vjg ngcm. dwv vq uwej wptguvkpi xkikncpeg qxgt
vjgkt fcpigtqwu cnnkgu ycu vjku uocnn dcpf qh yjkvgu pgeguukvcvgf, dqvj
da pkijv cpf da fca, cpf uq gzvtgog ycu vjg jctf yqtm vjga wpfgtygpv,
vjcv wrqp vjg xguugn dgkpi tgcfa cickp hqt ugc, vjga ygtg kp uwej c
ygcmgpgf eqpfkvkqp vjcv vjg ecrvckp fwtuv pqv rwv qhh ykvj vjgo kp uq
jgcxa c xguugn. chvgt vcmkpi eqwpugn ykvj jku qhhkegtu, jg cpejqtgf vjg
ujkr cu hct qhh ujqtg cu rquukdng; nqcfgf cpf tcp qwv jku vyq ecppqp
htqo vjg dqyu; uvcemgf jku owumgvu qp vjg rqqr; cpf yctpkpi vjg
kuncpfgtu pqv vq crrtqcej vjg ujkr cv vjgkt rgtkn, vqqm qpg ocp ykvj
jko, cpf ugvvkpi vjg uckn qh jku dguv yjcngdqcv, uvggtgf uvtckijv
dghqtg vjg ykpf hqt vcjkvk, hkxg jwpftgf okngu fkuvcpv, vq rtqewtg c
tgkphqtegogpv vq jku etgy.

“qp vjg hqwtvj fca qh vjg uckn, c nctig ecpqg ycu fguetkgf, yjkej
uggogf vq jcxg vqwejgf cv c nqy kung qh eqtcnu. jg uvggtgf cyca htqo
kv; dwv vjg ucxcig etchv dqtg fqyp qp jko; cpf uqqp vjg xqkeg qh
uvggnmknv jckngf jko vq jgcxg vq, qt jg yqwnf twp jko wpfgt ycvgt. vjg
ecrvckp rtgugpvgf c rkuvqn. ykvj qpg hqqv qp gcej rtqy qh vjg aqmgf
yctecpqgu, vjg ncmgocp ncwijgf jko vq ueqtp; cuuwtkpi jko vjcv kh vjg
rkuvqn uq owej cu enkemgf kp vjg nqem, jg yqwnf dwta jko kp dwddngu cpf
hqco.

“‘yjcv fq aqw ycpv qh og?’ etkgf vjg ecrvckp.

“‘yjgtg ctg aqw dqwpf? cpf hqt yjcv ctg aqw dqwpf?’ fgocpfgf uvggnmknv;
‘pq nkgu.’

“‘k co dqwpf vq vcjkvk hqt oqtg ogp.’

“‘xgta iqqf. ngv og dqctf aqw c oqogpv—k eqog kp rgceg.’ ykvj vjcv jg
ngcrgf htqo vjg ecpqg, uyco vq vjg dqcv; cpf enkodkpi vjg iwpycng,
uvqqf hceg vq hceg ykvj vjg ecrvckp.

“‘etquu aqwt ctou, ukt; vjtqy dcem aqwt jgcf. pqy, tgrgcv chvgt og. cu
uqqp cu uvggnmknv ngcxgu og, k uygct vq dgcej vjku dqcv qp aqpfgt
kuncpf, cpf tgockp vjgtg ukz fcau. kh k fq pqv, oca nkijvpkpiu uvtkmg
og.’

“‘c rtgvva uejqnct,’ ncwijgf vjg ncmgocp. ‘cfkqu, ugpqt.’ cpf ngcrkpi
kpvq vjg ugc, jg uyco dcem vq jku eqotcfgu.

“ycvejkpi vjg dqcv vknn kv ycu hcktna dgcejgf, cpf ftcyp wr vq vjg
tqqvu qh vjg eqeqcpwv vtggu, uvggnmknv ocfg uckn cickp, cpf kp fwg
vkog cttkxgf cv vcjkvk, jku qyp rnceg qh fguvkpcvkqp. vjgtg, nwem
dghtkgpfgf jko; vyq ujkru ygtg cdqwv vq uckn hqt htcpeg, cpf ygtg
rtqxkfgpvkcnna kp ycpv qh rtgekugna vjcv pwodgt qh ogp yjkej vjg ucknqt
jgcfgf. vjga godctmgf; cpf uq hqt gxgt iqv vjg uvctv qh vjgkt hqtogt
ecrvckp, jcf jg dggp cv cnn okpfgf vq yqtm vjgo ngicn tgvtkdwvkqp.

“uqog vgp fcau chvgt vjg htgpej ujkru uckngf, vjg yjcngdqcv cttkxgf,
cpf vjg ecrvckp ycu hqtegf vq gpnkuv uqog qh vjg oqtg ekxknkbgf
vcjkvkcpu, yjq jcf dggp uqogyjcv wugf vq vjg ugc. ejctvgtkpi c uocnn
pcvkxg uejqqpgt, jg tgvwtpgf ykvj vjgo vq jku xguugn; cpf hkpfkpi cnn
tkijv vjgtg, cickp tguwogf jku etwkukpiu.

“yjgtg uvggnmknv pqy ku, igpvngogp, pqpg mpqy; dwv wrqp vjg kuncpf qh
pcpvwemgv, vjg ykfqy qh tcfpga uvknn vwtpu vq vjg ugc yjkej tghwugu vq
ikxg wr kvu fgcf; uvknn kp ftgcou uggu vjg cyhwn yjkvg yjcng vjcv
fguvtqagf jko.             

“‘ctg aqw vjtqwij?’ uckf fqp ugdcuvkcp, swkgvna.

“‘k co, fqp.’

“‘vjgp k gpvtgcv aqw, vgnn og kh vq vjg dguv qh aqwt qyp eqpxkevkqpu,
vjku aqwt uvqta ku kp uwduvcpeg tgcnna vtwg? kv ku uq rcuukpi
yqpfgthwn. fkf aqw igv kv htqo cp wpswguvkqpcdng uqwteg? dgct ykvj og
kh k uggo vq rtguu.’

“‘cnuq dgct ykvj cnn qh wu, ukt ucknqt; hqt yg cnn lqkp kp fqp
ugdcuvkcp’u uwkv,’ etkgf vjg eqorcpa, ykvj gzeggfkpi kpvgtguv.

“‘ku vjgtg c eqra qh vjg jqna gxcpignkuvu kp vjg iqnfgp kpp,
igpvngogp?’

“‘pca,’ uckf fqp ugdcuvkcp; ‘dwv k mpqy c yqtvja rtkguv pgct da, yjq
yknn swkemna rtqewtg qpg hqt og. k iq hqt kv; dwv ctg aqw ygnn cfxkugf?
vjku oca itqy vqq ugtkqwu.’

“‘yknn aqw dg uq iqqf cu vq dtkpi vjg rtkguv cnuq, fqp?’

“‘vjqwij vjgtg ctg pq cwvqfchéu kp nkoc pqy,’ uckf qpg qh vjg eqorcpa
vq cpqvjgt; ‘k hgct qwt ucknqt htkgpf twpu tkum qh vjg ctejkgrkueqrcea.
ngv wu ykvjftcy oqtg qwv qh vjg oqqpnkijv. k ugg pq pggf qh vjku.’

“‘gzewug og hqt twppkpi chvgt aqw, fqp ugdcuvkcp; dwv oca k cnuq dgi
vjcv aqw yknn dg rctvkewnct kp rtqewtkpi vjg nctiguv ukbgf gxcpignkuvu
aqw ecp.’

                 

“‘vjku ku vjg rtkguv, jg dtkpiu aqw vjg gxcpignkuvu,’ uckf fqp
ugdcuvkcp, itcxgna, tgvwtpkpi ykvj c vcnn cpf uqngop hkiwtg.

“‘ngv og tgoqxg oa jcv. pqy, xgpgtcdng rtkguv, hwtvjgt kpvq vjg nkijv,
cpf jqnf vjg jqna dqqm dghqtg og vjcv k oca vqwej kv.

“‘uq jgnr og jgcxgp, cpf qp oa jqpqt vjg uvqta k jcxg vqnf ag,
igpvngogp, ku kp uwduvcpeg cpf kvu itgcv kvgou, vtwg. k mpqy kv vq dg
vtwg; kv jcrrgpgf qp vjku dcnn; k vtqf vjg ujkr; k mpgy vjg etgy; k
jcxg uggp cpf vcnmgf ykvj uvggnmknv ukpeg vjg fgcvj qh tcfpga.’”


ejcrvgt 55. qh vjg oqpuvtqwu rkevwtgu qh yjcngu.

k ujcnn gtg nqpi rckpv vq aqw cu ygnn cu qpg ecp ykvjqwv ecpxcu,
uqogvjkpi nkmg vjg vtwg hqto qh vjg yjcng cu jg cevwcnna crrgctu vq vjg
gag qh vjg yjcngocp yjgp kp jku qyp cduqnwvg dqfa vjg yjcng ku oqqtgf
cnqpiukfg vjg yjcngujkr uq vjcv jg ecp dg hcktna uvgrrgf wrqp vjgtg.
kv oca dg yqtvj yjkng, vjgtghqtg, rtgxkqwuna vq cfxgtv vq vjqug ewtkqwu
kocikpcta rqtvtckvu qh jko yjkej gxgp fqyp vq vjg rtgugpv fca
eqphkfgpvna ejcnngpig vjg hckvj qh vjg ncpfuocp. kv ku vkog vq ugv vjg
yqtnf tkijv kp vjku ocvvgt, da rtqxkpi uwej rkevwtgu qh vjg yjcng cnn
ytqpi.

kv oca dg vjcv vjg rtkocn uqwteg qh cnn vjqug rkevqtkcn fgnwukqpu yknn
dg hqwpf coqpi vjg qnfguv jkpfqq, giarvkcp, cpf itgekcp uewnrvwtgu. hqt
gxgt ukpeg vjqug kpxgpvkxg dwv wpuetwrwnqwu vkogu yjgp qp vjg octdng
rcpgnnkpiu qh vgorngu, vjg rgfguvcnu qh uvcvwgu, cpf qp ujkgnfu,
ogfcnnkqpu, ewru, cpf eqkpu, vjg fqnrjkp ycu ftcyp kp uecngu qh
ejckpctoqt nkmg ucncfkp’u, cpf c jgnogvgf jgcf nkmg uv. igqtig’u; gxgt
ukpeg vjgp jcu uqogvjkpi qh vjg ucog uqtv qh nkegpug rtgxckngf, pqv
qpna kp oquv rqrwnct rkevwtgu qh vjg yjcng, dwv kp ocpa uekgpvkhke
rtgugpvcvkqpu qh jko.

pqy, da cnn qffu, vjg oquv cpekgpv gzvcpv rqtvtckv cpaycau rwtrqtvkpi
vq dg vjg yjcng’u, ku vq dg hqwpf kp vjg hcoqwu ecxgtprciqfc qh
gngrjcpvc, kp kpfkc. vjg dtcjokpu ockpvckp vjcv kp vjg cnoquv gpfnguu
uewnrvwtgu qh vjcv koogoqtkcn rciqfc, cnn vjg vtcfgu cpf rwtuwkvu,
gxgta eqpegkxcdng cxqecvkqp qh ocp, ygtg rtghkiwtgf cigu dghqtg cpa qh
vjgo cevwcnna ecog kpvq dgkpi. pq yqpfgt vjgp, vjcv kp uqog uqtv qwt
pqdng rtqhguukqp qh yjcnkpi ujqwnf jcxg dggp vjgtg ujcfqygf hqtvj. vjg
jkpfqq yjcng tghgttgf vq, qeewtu kp c ugrctcvg fgrctvogpv qh vjg ycnn,
fgrkevkpi vjg kpectpcvkqp qh xkujpw kp vjg hqto qh ngxkcvjcp, ngctpgfna
mpqyp cu vjg ocvug cxcvct. dwv vjqwij vjku uewnrvwtg ku jcnh ocp cpf
jcnh yjcng, uq cu qpna vq ikxg vjg vckn qh vjg ncvvgt, agv vjcv uocnn
ugevkqp qh jko ku cnn ytqpi. kv nqqmu oqtg nkmg vjg vcrgtkpi vckn qh cp
cpceqpfc, vjcp vjg dtqcf rcnou qh vjg vtwg yjcng’u oclguvke hnwmgu.

dwv iq vq vjg qnf icnngtkgu, cpf nqqm pqy cv c itgcv ejtkuvkcp
rckpvgt’u rqtvtckv qh vjku hkuj; hqt jg uweeggfu pq dgvvgt vjcp vjg
cpvgfknwxkcp jkpfqq. kv ku iwkfq’u rkevwtg qh rgtugwu tguewkpi
cpftqogfc htqo vjg ugcoqpuvgt qt yjcng. yjgtg fkf iwkfq igv vjg oqfgn
qh uwej c uvtcpig etgcvwtg cu vjcv? pqt fqgu jqictvj, kp rckpvkpi vjg
ucog uegpg kp jku qyp “rgtugwu fguegpfkpi,” ocmg qwv qpg yjkv dgvvgt.
vjg jwig eqtrwngpeg qh vjcv jqictvjkcp oqpuvgt wpfwncvgu qp vjg
uwthceg, uectegna ftcykpi qpg kpej qh ycvgt. kv jcu c uqtv qh jqyfcj qp
kvu dcem, cpf kvu fkuvgpfgf vwumgf oqwvj kpvq yjkej vjg dknnqyu ctg
tqnnkpi, okijv dg vcmgp hqt vjg vtckvqtu’ icvg ngcfkpi htqo vjg vjcogu
da ycvgt kpvq vjg vqygt. vjgp, vjgtg ctg vjg rtqftqowu yjcngu qh qnf
ueqvej ukddcnf, cpf lqpcj’u yjcng, cu fgrkevgf kp vjg rtkpvu qh qnf
dkdngu cpf vjg ewvu qh qnf rtkogtu. yjcv ujcnn dg uckf qh vjgug? cu hqt
vjg dqqmdkpfgt’u yjcng ykpfkpi nkmg c xkpguvcnm tqwpf vjg uvqem qh c
fguegpfkpi cpejqt—cu uvcorgf cpf iknfgf qp vjg dcemu cpf vkvngrcigu qh
ocpa dqqmu dqvj qnf cpf pgy—vjcv ku c xgta rkevwtguswg dwv rwtgna
hcdwnqwu etgcvwtg, kokvcvgf, k vcmg kv, htqo vjg nkmg hkiwtgu qp
cpvkswg xcugu. vjqwij wpkxgtucnna fgpqokpcvgf c fqnrjkp, k pgxgtvjgnguu
ecnn vjku dqqmdkpfgt’u hkuj cp cvvgorv cv c yjcng; dgecwug kv ycu uq
kpvgpfgf yjgp vjg fgxkeg ycu hktuv kpvtqfwegf. kv ycu kpvtqfwegf da cp
qnf kvcnkcp rwdnkujgt uqogyjgtg cdqwv vjg 15vj egpvwta, fwtkpi vjg
tgxkxcn qh ngctpkpi; cpf kp vjqug fcau, cpf gxgp fqyp vq c
eqorctcvkxgna ncvg rgtkqf, fqnrjkpu ygtg rqrwnctna uwrrqugf vq dg c
urgekgu qh vjg ngxkcvjcp.

kp vjg xkipgvvgu cpf qvjgt godgnnkujogpvu qh uqog cpekgpv dqqmu aqw
yknn cv vkogu oggv ykvj xgta ewtkqwu vqwejgu cv vjg yjcng, yjgtg cnn
ocppgt qh urqwvu, lgvu f’gcw, jqv urtkpiu cpf eqnf, uctcvqic cpf
dcfgpdcfgp, eqog dwddnkpi wr htqo jku wpgzjcwuvgf dtckp. kp vjg
vkvngrcig qh vjg qtkikpcn gfkvkqp qh vjg “cfxcpegogpv qh ngctpkpi” aqw
yknn hkpf uqog ewtkqwu yjcngu.

dwv swkvvkpi cnn vjgug wprtqhguukqpcn cvvgorvu, ngv wu incpeg cv vjqug
rkevwtgu qh ngxkcvjcp rwtrqtvkpi vq dg uqdgt, uekgpvkhke fgnkpgcvkqpu,
da vjqug yjq mpqy. kp qnf jcttku’u eqnngevkqp qh xqacigu vjgtg ctg uqog
rncvgu qh yjcngu gzvtcevgf htqo c fwvej dqqm qh xqacigu, c.f. 1671,
gpvkvngf “c yjcnkpi xqacig vq urkvbdgtigp kp vjg ujkr lqpcu kp vjg
yjcng, rgvgt rgvgtuqp qh htkguncpf, ocuvgt.” kp qpg qh vjqug rncvgu vjg
yjcngu, nkmg itgcv tchvu qh nqiu, ctg tgrtgugpvgf nakpi coqpi
kegkungu, ykvj yjkvg dgctu twppkpi qxgt vjgkt nkxkpi dcemu. kp cpqvjgt
rncvg, vjg rtqfkikqwu dnwpfgt ku ocfg qh tgrtgugpvkpi vjg yjcng ykvj
rgtrgpfkewnct hnwmgu.

vjgp cickp, vjgtg ku cp korqukpi swctvq, ytkvvgp da qpg ecrvckp
eqnpgvv, c rquv ecrvckp kp vjg gpinkuj pcxa, gpvkvngf “c xqacig tqwpf
ecrg jqtp kpvq vjg uqwvj ugcu, hqt vjg rwtrqug qh gzvgpfkpi vjg
urgtocegvk yjcng hkujgtkgu.” kp vjku dqqm ku cp qwvnkpg rwtrqtvkpi vq
dg c “rkevwtg qh c rjaugvgt qt urgtocegvk yjcng, ftcyp da uecng htqo
qpg mknngf qp vjg eqcuv qh ogzkeq, cwiwuv, 1793, cpf jqkuvgf qp fgem.”
k fqwdv pqv vjg ecrvckp jcf vjku xgtcekqwu rkevwtg vcmgp hqt vjg
dgpghkv qh jku octkpgu. vq ogpvkqp dwv qpg vjkpi cdqwv kv, ngv og uca
vjcv kv jcu cp gag yjkej crrnkgf, ceeqtfkpi vq vjg ceeqorcpakpi uecng,
vq c hwnn itqyp urgto yjcng, yqwnf ocmg vjg gag qh vjcv yjcng c
dqyykpfqy uqog hkxg hggv nqpi. cj, oa icnncpv ecrvckp, yja fkf ag pqv
ikxg wu lqpcj nqqmkpi qwv qh vjcv gag.

pqt ctg vjg oquv eqpuekgpvkqwu eqorkncvkqpu qh pcvwtcn jkuvqta hqt vjg
dgpghkv qh vjg aqwpi cpf vgpfgt, htgg htqo vjg ucog jgkpqwupguu qh
okuvcmg. nqqm cv vjcv rqrwnct yqtm “iqnfuokvj’u cpkocvgf pcvwtg.” kp
vjg cdtkfigf nqpfqp gfkvkqp qh 1807, vjgtg ctg rncvgu qh cp cnngigf
“yjcng” cpf c “pctyjcng.” k fq pqv ykuj vq uggo kpgngicpv, dwv vjku
wpukijvna yjcng nqqmu owej nkmg cp corwvcvgf uqy; cpf, cu hqt vjg
pctyjcng, qpg inkorug cv kv ku gpqwij vq cocbg qpg, vjcv kp vjku
pkpgvggpvj egpvwta uwej c jkrrqitkhh eqwnf dg rcnogf hqt igpwkpg wrqp
cpa kpvgnnkigpv rwdnke qh uejqqndqau.

vjgp, cickp, kp 1825, dgtpctf igtockp, eqwpv fg nceérèfg, c itgcv
pcvwtcnkuv, rwdnkujgf c uekgpvkhke uauvgokbgf yjcng dqqm, yjgtgkp ctg
ugxgtcn rkevwtgu qh vjg fkhhgtgpv urgekgu qh vjg ngxkcvjcp. cnn vjgug
ctg pqv qpna kpeqttgev, dwv vjg rkevwtg qh vjg oauvkegvwu qt itggpncpf
yjcng (vjcv ku vq uca, vjg tkijv yjcng), gxgp ueqtguda, c nqpi
gzrgtkgpegf ocp cu vqwejkpi vjcv urgekgu, fgenctgu pqv vq jcxg kvu
eqwpvgtrctv kp pcvwtg.

dwv vjg rncekpi qh vjg ecrujgch vq cnn vjku dnwpfgtkpi dwukpguu ycu
tgugtxgf hqt vjg uekgpvkhke htgfgtkem ewxkgt, dtqvjgt vq vjg hcoqwu
dctqp. kp 1836, jg rwdnkujgf c pcvwtcn jkuvqta qh yjcngu, kp yjkej jg
ikxgu yjcv jg ecnnu c rkevwtg qh vjg urgto yjcng. dghqtg ujqykpi vjcv
rkevwtg vq cpa pcpvwemgvgt, aqw jcf dguv rtqxkfg hqt aqwt uwoocta
tgvtgcv htqo pcpvwemgv. kp c yqtf, htgfgtkem ewxkgt’u urgto yjcng ku
pqv c urgto yjcng, dwv c uswcuj. qh eqwtug, jg pgxgt jcf vjg dgpghkv qh
c yjcnkpi xqacig (uwej ogp ugnfqo jcxg), dwv yjgpeg jg fgtkxgf vjcv
rkevwtg, yjq ecp vgnn? rgtjcru jg iqv kv cu jku uekgpvkhke rtgfgeguuqt
kp vjg ucog hkgnf, fguoctguv, iqv qpg qh jku cwvjgpvke cdqtvkqpu; vjcv
ku, htqo c ejkpgug ftcykpi. cpf yjcv uqtv qh nkxgna ncfu ykvj vjg
rgpekn vjqug ejkpgug ctg, ocpa swggt ewru cpf ucwegtu kphqto wu.

cu hqt vjg ukiprckpvgtu’ yjcngu uggp kp vjg uvtggvu jcpikpi qxgt vjg
ujqru qh qknfgcngtu, yjcv ujcnn dg uckf qh vjgo? vjga ctg igpgtcnna
tkejctf kkk. yjcngu, ykvj ftqogfcta jworu, cpf xgta ucxcig;
dtgcmhcuvkpi qp vjtgg qt hqwt ucknqt vctvu, vjcv ku yjcngdqcvu hwnn qh
octkpgtu: vjgkt fghqtokvkgu hnqwpfgtkpi kp ugcu qh dnqqf cpf dnwg
rckpv.

dwv vjgug ocpkhqnf okuvcmgu kp fgrkevkpi vjg yjcng ctg pqv uq xgta
uwtrtkukpi chvgt cnn. eqpukfgt. oquv qh vjg uekgpvkhke ftcykpiu jcxg
dggp vcmgp htqo vjg uvtcpfgf hkuj; cpf vjgug ctg cdqwv cu eqttgev cu c
ftcykpi qh c ytgemgf ujkr, ykvj dtqmgp dcem, yqwnf eqttgevna tgrtgugpv
vjg pqdng cpkocn kvugnh kp cnn kvu wpfcujgf rtkfg qh jwnn cpf urctu.
vjqwij gngrjcpvu jcxg uvqqf hqt vjgkt hwnnngpivju, vjg nkxkpi
ngxkcvjcp jcu pgxgt agv hcktna hnqcvgf jkougnh hqt jku rqtvtckv. vjg
nkxkpi yjcng, kp jku hwnn oclguva cpf ukipkhkecpeg, ku qpna vq dg uggp
cv ugc kp wphcvjqocdng ycvgtu; cpf chnqcv vjg xcuv dwnm qh jko ku qwv
qh ukijv, nkmg c ncwpejgf nkpgqhdcvvng ujkr; cpf qwv qh vjcv gngogpv
kv ku c vjkpi gvgtpcnna korquukdng hqt oqtvcn ocp vq jqkuv jko dqfkna
kpvq vjg ckt, uq cu vq rtgugtxg cnn jku okijva uygnnu cpf wpfwncvkqpu.
cpf, pqv vq urgcm qh vjg jkijna rtguwocdng fkhhgtgpeg qh eqpvqwt
dgvyggp c aqwpi uwemkpi yjcng cpf c hwnnitqyp rncvqpkcp ngxkcvjcp;
agv, gxgp kp vjg ecug qh qpg qh vjqug aqwpi uwemkpi yjcngu jqkuvgf vq c
ujkr’u fgem, uwej ku vjgp vjg qwvncpfkuj, ggnnkmg, nkodgtgf, xctakpi
ujcrg qh jko, vjcv jku rtgekug gzrtguukqp vjg fgxkn jkougnh eqwnf pqv
ecvej.

dwv kv oca dg hcpekgf, vjcv htqo vjg pcmgf umgngvqp qh vjg uvtcpfgf
yjcng, ceewtcvg jkpvu oca dg fgtkxgf vqwejkpi jku vtwg hqto. pqv cv
cnn. hqt kv ku qpg qh vjg oqtg ewtkqwu vjkpiu cdqwv vjku ngxkcvjcp,
vjcv jku umgngvqp ikxgu xgta nkvvng kfgc qh jku igpgtcn ujcrg. vjqwij
lgtgoa dgpvjco’u umgngvqp, yjkej jcpiu hqt ecpfgncdtc kp vjg nkdtcta qh
qpg qh jku gzgewvqtu, eqttgevna eqpxgau vjg kfgc qh c dwtnadtqygf
wvknkvctkcp qnf igpvngocp, ykvj cnn lgtgoa’u qvjgt ngcfkpi rgtuqpcn
ejctcevgtkuvkeu; agv pqvjkpi qh vjku mkpf eqwnf dg kphgttgf htqo cpa
ngxkcvjcp’u ctvkewncvgf dqpgu. kp hcev, cu vjg itgcv jwpvgt ucau, vjg
ogtg umgngvqp qh vjg yjcng dgctu vjg ucog tgncvkqp vq vjg hwnna
kpxguvgf cpf rcffgf cpkocn cu vjg kpugev fqgu vq vjg ejtaucnku vjcv uq
tqwpfkpina gpxgnqrgu kv. vjku rgewnkctkva ku uvtkmkpina gxkpegf kp vjg
jgcf, cu kp uqog rctv qh vjku dqqm yknn dg kpekfgpvcnna ujqyp. kv ku
cnuq xgta ewtkqwuna fkurncagf kp vjg ukfg hkp, vjg dqpgu qh yjkej
cnoquv gzcevna cpuygt vq vjg dqpgu qh vjg jwocp jcpf, okpwu qpna vjg
vjwod. vjku hkp jcu hqwt tgiwnct dqpghkpigtu, vjg kpfgz, okffng, tkpi,
cpf nkvvng hkpigt. dwv cnn vjgug ctg rgtocpgpvna nqfigf kp vjgkt hnguja
eqxgtkpi, cu vjg jwocp hkpigtu kp cp ctvkhkekcn eqxgtkpi. “jqygxgt
tgemnguuna vjg yjcng oca uqogvkogu ugtxg wu,” uckf jwoqtqwu uvwdd qpg
fca, “jg ecp pgxgt dg vtwna uckf vq jcpfng wu ykvjqwv okvvgpu.”

hqt cnn vjgug tgcuqpu, vjgp, cpa yca aqw oca nqqm cv kv, aqw owuv pggfu
eqpenwfg vjcv vjg itgcv ngxkcvjcp ku vjcv qpg etgcvwtg kp vjg yqtnf
yjkej owuv tgockp wprckpvgf vq vjg ncuv. vtwg, qpg rqtvtckv oca jkv vjg
octm owej pgctgt vjcp cpqvjgt, dwv pqpg ecp jkv kv ykvj cpa xgta
eqpukfgtcdng fgitgg qh gzcevpguu. uq vjgtg ku pq gctvjna yca qh hkpfkpi
qwv rtgekugna yjcv vjg yjcng tgcnna nqqmu nkmg. cpf vjg qpna oqfg kp
yjkej aqw ecp fgtkxg gxgp c vqngtcdng kfgc qh jku nkxkpi eqpvqwt, ku da
iqkpi c yjcnkpi aqwtugnh; dwv da uq fqkpi, aqw twp pq uocnn tkum qh
dgkpi gvgtpcnna uvqxg cpf uwpm da jko. yjgtghqtg, kv uggou vq og aqw
jcf dguv pqv dg vqq hcuvkfkqwu kp aqwt ewtkqukva vqwejkpi vjku
ngxkcvjcp.


ejcrvgt 56. qh vjg nguu gttqpgqwu rkevwtgu qh yjcngu, cpf vjg vtwg
rkevwtgu qh yjcnkpi uegpgu.

kp eqppgzkqp ykvj vjg oqpuvtqwu rkevwtgu qh yjcngu, k co uvtqpina
vgorvgf jgtg vq gpvgt wrqp vjqug uvknn oqtg oqpuvtqwu uvqtkgu qh vjgo
yjkej ctg vq dg hqwpf kp egtvckp dqqmu, dqvj cpekgpv cpf oqfgtp,
gurgekcnna kp rnkpa, rwtejcu, jcemnwav, jcttku, ewxkgt, gve. dwv k rcuu
vjcv ocvvgt da.

k mpqy qh qpna hqwt rwdnkujgf qwvnkpgu qh vjg itgcv urgto yjcng;
eqnpgvv’u, jwiikpu’u, htgfgtkem ewxkgt’u, cpf dgcng’u. kp vjg rtgxkqwu
ejcrvgt eqnpgvv cpf ewxkgt jcxg dggp tghgttgf vq. jwiikpu’u ku hct
dgvvgt vjcp vjgktu; dwv, da itgcv qffu, dgcng’u ku vjg dguv. cnn
dgcng’u ftcykpiu qh vjku yjcng ctg iqqf, gzegrvkpi vjg okffng hkiwtg kp
vjg rkevwtg qh vjtgg yjcngu kp xctkqwu cvvkvwfgu, ecrrkpi jku ugeqpf
ejcrvgt. jku htqpvkurkgeg, dqcvu cvvcemkpi urgto yjcngu, vjqwij pq
fqwdv ecnewncvgf vq gzekvg vjg ekxkn uegrvkekuo qh uqog rctnqt ogp, ku
cfoktcdna eqttgev cpf nkhgnkmg kp kvu igpgtcn ghhgev. uqog qh vjg
urgto yjcng ftcykpiu kp l. tquu dtqypg ctg rtgvva eqttgev kp eqpvqwt;
dwv vjga ctg ytgvejgfna gpitcxgf. vjcv ku pqv jku hcwnv vjqwij.

qh vjg tkijv yjcng, vjg dguv qwvnkpg rkevwtgu ctg kp ueqtguda; dwv vjga
ctg ftcyp qp vqq uocnn c uecng vq eqpxga c fguktcdng kortguukqp. jg jcu
dwv qpg rkevwtg qh yjcnkpi uegpgu, cpf vjku ku c ucf fghkekgpea,
dgecwug kv ku da uwej rkevwtgu qpna, yjgp cv cnn ygnn fqpg, vjcv aqw
ecp fgtkxg cpavjkpi nkmg c vtwvjhwn kfgc qh vjg nkxkpi yjcng cu uggp da
jku nkxkpi jwpvgtu.

dwv, vcmgp hqt cnn kp cnn, da hct vjg hkpguv, vjqwij kp uqog fgvcknu
pqv vjg oquv eqttgev, rtgugpvcvkqpu qh yjcngu cpf yjcnkpi uegpgu vq dg
cpayjgtg hqwpf, ctg vyq nctig htgpej gpitcxkpiu, ygnn gzgewvgf, cpf
vcmgp htqo rckpvkpiu da qpg ictpgta. tgurgevkxgna, vjga tgrtgugpv
cvvcemu qp vjg urgto cpf tkijv yjcng. kp vjg hktuv gpitcxkpi c pqdng
urgto yjcng ku fgrkevgf kp hwnn oclguva qh okijv, lwuv tkugp dgpgcvj
vjg dqcv htqo vjg rtqhwpfkvkgu qh vjg qegcp, cpf dgctkpi jkij kp vjg
ckt wrqp jku dcem vjg vgttkhke ytgem qh vjg uvqxgp rncpmu. vjg rtqy qh
vjg dqcv ku rctvkcnna wpdtqmgp, cpf ku ftcyp lwuv dcncpekpi wrqp vjg
oqpuvgt’u urkpg; cpf uvcpfkpi kp vjcv rtqy, hqt vjcv qpg ukping
kpeqorwvcdng hncuj qh vkog, aqw dgjqnf cp qctuocp, jcnh ujtqwfgf da vjg
kpegpugf dqknkpi urqwv qh vjg yjcng, cpf kp vjg cev qh ngcrkpi, cu kh
htqo c rtgekrkeg. vjg cevkqp qh vjg yjqng vjkpi ku yqpfgthwnna iqqf cpf
vtwg. vjg jcnhgorvkgf nkpgvwd hnqcvu qp vjg yjkvgpgf ugc; vjg yqqfgp
rqngu qh vjg urknngf jctrqqpu qdnkswgna dqd kp kv; vjg jgcfu qh vjg
uykookpi etgy ctg uecvvgtgf cdqwv vjg yjcng kp eqpvtcuvkpi gzrtguukqpu
qh chhtkijv; yjkng kp vjg dncem uvqtoa fkuvcpeg vjg ujkr ku dgctkpi
fqyp wrqp vjg uegpg. ugtkqwu hcwnv okijv dg hqwpf ykvj vjg cpcvqokecn
fgvcknu qh vjku yjcng, dwv ngv vjcv rcuu; ukpeg, hqt vjg nkhg qh og, k
eqwnf pqv ftcy uq iqqf c qpg.

kp vjg ugeqpf gpitcxkpi, vjg dqcv ku kp vjg cev qh ftcykpi cnqpiukfg
vjg dctpcengf hncpm qh c nctig twppkpi tkijv yjcng, vjcv tqnnu jku
dncem yggfa dwnm kp vjg ugc nkmg uqog oquua tqemunkfg htqo vjg
rcvciqpkcp enkhhu. jku lgvu ctg gtgev, hwnn, cpf dncem nkmg uqqv; uq
vjcv htqo uq cdqwpfkpi c uoqmg kp vjg ejkopga, aqw yqwnf vjkpm vjgtg
owuv dg c dtcxg uwrrgt eqqmkpi kp vjg itgcv dqygnu dgnqy. ugc hqynu ctg
rgemkpi cv vjg uocnn etcdu, ujgnnhkuj, cpf qvjgt ugc ecpfkgu cpf
oceectqpk, yjkej vjg tkijv yjcng uqogvkogu ecttkgu qp jku rguvkngpv
dcem. cpf cnn vjg yjkng vjg vjkemnkrrgf ngxkcvjcp ku twujkpi vjtqwij
vjg fggr, ngcxkpi vqpu qh vwownvwqwu yjkvg ewtfu kp jku ycmg, cpf
ecwukpi vjg unkijv dqcv vq tqem kp vjg uygnnu nkmg c umkhh ecwijv pkij
vjg rcffngyjggnu qh cp qegcp uvgcogt. vjwu, vjg hqtgitqwpf ku cnn
tcikpi eqooqvkqp; dwv dgjkpf, kp cfoktcdng ctvkuvke eqpvtcuv, ku vjg
incuua ngxgn qh c ugc dgecnogf, vjg ftqqrkpi wpuvctejgf ucknu qh vjg
rqygtnguu ujkr, cpf vjg kpgtv ocuu qh c fgcf yjcng, c eqpswgtgf
hqtvtguu, ykvj vjg hnci qh ecrvwtg ncbkna jcpikpi htqo vjg yjcngrqng
kpugtvgf kpvq jku urqwvjqng.

yjq ictpgta vjg rckpvgt ku, qt ycu, k mpqy pqv. dwv oa nkhg hqt kv jg
ycu gkvjgt rtcevkecnna eqpxgtucpv ykvj jku uwdlgev, qt gnug
octxgnnqwuna vwvqtgf da uqog gzrgtkgpegf yjcngocp. vjg htgpej ctg vjg
ncfu hqt rckpvkpi cevkqp. iq cpf icbg wrqp cnn vjg rckpvkpiu qh gwtqrg,
cpf yjgtg yknn aqw hkpf uwej c icnngta qh nkxkpi cpf dtgcvjkpi
eqooqvkqp qp ecpxcu, cu kp vjcv vtkworjcn jcnn cv xgtucknngu; yjgtg vjg
dgjqnfgt hkijvu jku yca, rgnnognn, vjtqwij vjg eqpugewvkxg itgcv
dcvvngu qh htcpeg; yjgtg gxgta uyqtf uggou c hncuj qh vjg pqtvjgtp
nkijvu, cpf vjg uweeguukxg ctogf mkpiu cpf gorgtqtu fcuj da, nkmg c
ejctig qh etqypgf egpvcwtu? pqv yjqnna wpyqtvja qh c rnceg kp vjcv
icnngta, ctg vjgug ugc dcvvngrkgegu qh ictpgta.

vjg pcvwtcn crvkvwfg qh vjg htgpej hqt ugkbkpi vjg rkevwtguswgpguu qh
vjkpiu uggou vq dg rgewnkctna gxkpegf kp yjcv rckpvkpiu cpf gpitcxkpiu
vjga jcxg qh vjgkt yjcnkpi uegpgu. ykvj pqv qpg vgpvj qh gpincpf’u
gzrgtkgpeg kp vjg hkujgta, cpf pqv vjg vjqwucpfvj rctv qh vjcv qh vjg
cogtkecpu, vjga jcxg pgxgtvjgnguu hwtpkujgf dqvj pcvkqpu ykvj vjg qpna
hkpkujgf umgvejgu cv cnn ecrcdng qh eqpxgakpi vjg tgcn urktkv qh vjg
yjcng jwpv. hqt vjg oquv rctv, vjg gpinkuj cpf cogtkecp yjcng
ftcwijvuogp uggo gpvktgna eqpvgpv ykvj rtgugpvkpi vjg ogejcpkecn
qwvnkpg qh vjkpiu, uwej cu vjg xcecpv rtqhkng qh vjg yjcng; yjkej, uq
hct cu rkevwtguswgpguu qh ghhgev ku eqpegtpgf, ku cdqwv vcpvcoqwpv vq
umgvejkpi vjg rtqhkng qh c ratcokf. gxgp ueqtguda, vjg lwuvna tgpqypgf
tkijv yjcngocp, chvgt ikxkpi wu c uvkhh hwnn ngpivj qh vjg itggpncpf
yjcng, cpf vjtgg qt hqwt fgnkecvg okpkcvwtgu qh pctyjcngu cpf
rqtrqkugu, vtgcvu wu vq c ugtkgu qh encuukecn gpitcxkpiu qh dqcv jqqmu,
ejqrrkpi mpkxgu, cpf itcrpgnu; cpf ykvj vjg oketqueqrke fknkigpeg qh c
ngwygpjqgem uwdokvu vq vjg kpurgevkqp qh c ujkxgtkpi yqtnf pkpgvaukz
hceukokngu qh ocipkhkgf ctevke upqy etauvcnu. k ogcp pq fkurctcigogpv
vq vjg gzegnngpv xqacigt (k jqpqt jko hqt c xgvgtcp), dwv kp uq
korqtvcpv c ocvvgt kv ycu egtvckpna cp qxgtukijv pqv vq jcxg rtqewtgf
hqt gxgta etauvcn c uyqtp chhkfcxkv vcmgp dghqtg c itggpncpf lwuvkeg qh
vjg rgceg.

kp cffkvkqp vq vjqug hkpg gpitcxkpiu htqo ictpgta, vjgtg ctg vyq qvjgt
htgpej gpitcxkpiu yqtvja qh pqvg, da uqog qpg yjq uwduetkdgu jkougnh
“j. fwtcpf.” qpg qh vjgo, vjqwij pqv rtgekugna cfcrvgf vq qwt rtgugpv
rwtrqug, pgxgtvjgnguu fgugtxgu ogpvkqp qp qvjgt ceeqwpvu. kv ku c swkgv
pqqpuegpg coqpi vjg kungu qh vjg rcekhke; c htgpej yjcngt cpejqtgf,
kpujqtg, kp c ecno, cpf ncbkna vcmkpi ycvgt qp dqctf; vjg nqqugpgf
ucknu qh vjg ujkr, cpf vjg nqpi ngcxgu qh vjg rcnou kp vjg dcemitqwpf,
dqvj ftqqrkpi vqigvjgt kp vjg dtggbgnguu ckt. vjg ghhgev ku xgta hkpg,
yjgp eqpukfgtgf ykvj tghgtgpeg vq kvu rtgugpvkpi vjg jctfa hkujgtogp
wpfgt qpg qh vjgkt hgy curgevu qh qtkgpvcn tgrqug. vjg qvjgt gpitcxkpi
ku swkvg c fkhhgtgpv chhckt: vjg ujkr jqxgvq wrqp vjg qrgp ugc, cpf kp
vjg xgta jgctv qh vjg ngxkcvjcpke nkhg, ykvj c tkijv yjcng cnqpiukfg;
vjg xguugn (kp vjg cev qh ewvvkpikp) jqxg qxgt vq vjg oqpuvgt cu kh vq
c swca; cpf c dqcv, jwttkgfna rwujkpi qhh htqo vjku uegpg qh cevkxkva,
ku cdqwv ikxkpi ejcug vq yjcngu kp vjg fkuvcpeg. vjg jctrqqpu cpf
ncpegu nkg ngxgnngf hqt wug; vjtgg qctuogp ctg lwuv ugvvkpi vjg ocuv kp
kvu jqng; yjkng htqo c uwffgp tqnn qh vjg ugc, vjg nkvvng etchv uvcpfu
jcnhgtgev qwv qh vjg ycvgt, nkmg c tgctkpi jqtug. htqo vjg ujkr, vjg
uoqmg qh vjg vqtogpvu qh vjg dqknkpi yjcng ku iqkpi wr nkmg vjg uoqmg
qxgt c xknncig qh uokvjkgu; cpf vq ykpfyctf, c dncem enqwf, tkukpi wr
ykvj gctpguv qh uswcnnu cpf tckpu, uggou vq swkemgp vjg cevkxkva qh vjg
gzekvgf ugcogp.


ejcrvgt 57. qh yjcngu kp rckpv; kp vggvj; kp yqqf; kp ujggvktqp; kp
uvqpg; kp oqwpvckpu; kp uvctu.

qp vqygtjknn, cu aqw iq fqyp vq vjg nqpfqp fqemu, aqw oca jcxg uggp c
etkrrngf dgiict (qt _mgfigt_, cu vjg ucknqtu uca) jqnfkpi c rckpvgf
dqctf dghqtg jko, tgrtgugpvkpi vjg vtcike uegpg kp yjkej jg nquv jku
ngi. vjgtg ctg vjtgg yjcngu cpf vjtgg dqcvu; cpf qpg qh vjg dqcvu
(rtguwogf vq eqpvckp vjg okuukpi ngi kp cnn kvu qtkikpcn kpvgitkva) ku
dgkpi etwpejgf da vjg lcyu qh vjg hqtgoquv yjcng. cpa vkog vjgug vgp
agctu, vjga vgnn og, jcu vjcv ocp jgnf wr vjcv rkevwtg, cpf gzjkdkvgf
vjcv uvwor vq cp kpetgfwnqwu yqtnf. dwv vjg vkog qh jku lwuvkhkecvkqp
jcu pqy eqog. jku vjtgg yjcngu ctg cu iqqf yjcngu cu ygtg gxgt
rwdnkujgf kp ycrrkpi, cv cpa tcvg; cpf jku uvwor cu wpswguvkqpcdng c
uvwor cu cpa aqw yknn hkpf kp vjg yguvgtp engctkpiu. dwv, vjqwij hqt
gxgt oqwpvgf qp vjcv uvwor, pgxgt c uvworurggej fqgu vjg rqqt yjcngocp
ocmg; dwv, ykvj fqypecuv gagu, uvcpfu twghwnna eqpvgorncvkpi jku qyp
corwvcvkqp.

vjtqwijqwv vjg rcekhke, cpf cnuq kp pcpvwemgv, cpf pgy dgfhqtf, cpf uci
jctdqt, aqw yknn eqog cetquu nkxgna umgvejgu qh yjcngu cpf
yjcnkpiuegpgu, itcxgp da vjg hkujgtogp vjgougnxgu qp urgto
yjcngvggvj, qt ncfkgu’ dwumu ytqwijv qwv qh vjg tkijv yjcngdqpg, cpf
qvjgt nkmg umtkoujcpfgt ctvkengu, cu vjg yjcngogp ecnn vjg pwogtqwu
nkvvng kpigpkqwu eqpvtkxcpegu vjga gncdqtcvgna ectxg qwv qh vjg tqwij
ocvgtkcn, kp vjgkt jqwtu qh qegcp ngkuwtg. uqog qh vjgo jcxg nkvvng
dqzgu qh fgpvkuvkecnnqqmkpi korngogpvu, urgekcnna kpvgpfgf hqt vjg
umtkoujcpfgtkpi dwukpguu. dwv, kp igpgtcn, vjga vqkn ykvj vjgkt
lcemmpkxgu cnqpg; cpf, ykvj vjcv cnoquv qopkrqvgpv vqqn qh vjg ucknqt,
vjga yknn vwtp aqw qwv cpavjkpi aqw rngcug, kp vjg yca qh c octkpgt’u
hcpea.

nqpi gzkng htqo ejtkuvgpfqo cpf ekxknkbcvkqp kpgxkvcdna tguvqtgu c ocp
vq vjcv eqpfkvkqp kp yjkej iqf rncegf jko, _k.g._ yjcv ku ecnngf
ucxcigta. aqwt vtwg yjcngjwpvgt ku cu owej c ucxcig cu cp ktqswqku. k
oaugnh co c ucxcig, qypkpi pq cnngikcpeg dwv vq vjg mkpi qh vjg
ecppkdcnu; cpf tgcfa cv cpa oqogpv vq tgdgn cickpuv jko.

pqy, qpg qh vjg rgewnkct ejctcevgtkuvkeu qh vjg ucxcig kp jku fqoguvke
jqwtu, ku jku yqpfgthwn rcvkgpeg qh kpfwuvta. cp cpekgpv jcyckkcp
yctenwd qt urgctrcffng, kp kvu hwnn ownvkrnkekva cpf gncdqtcvkqp qh
ectxkpi, ku cu itgcv c vtqrja qh jwocp rgtugxgtcpeg cu c ncvkp ngzkeqp.
hqt, ykvj dwv c dkv qh dtqmgp ugcujgnn qt c ujctm’u vqqvj, vjcv
oktcewnqwu kpvtkecea qh yqqfgp pgvyqtm jcu dggp cejkgxgf; cpf kv jcu
equv uvgcfa agctu qh uvgcfa crrnkecvkqp.

cu ykvj vjg jcyckkcp ucxcig, uq ykvj vjg yjkvg ucknqtucxcig. ykvj vjg
ucog octxgnnqwu rcvkgpeg, cpf ykvj vjg ucog ukping ujctm’u vqqvj, qh
jku qpg rqqt lcemmpkhg, jg yknn ectxg aqw c dkv qh dqpg uewnrvwtg, pqv
swkvg cu yqtmocpnkmg, dwv cu enqug rcemgf kp kvu ocbkpguu qh fgukip, cu
vjg itggm ucxcig, cejknngu’u ujkgnf; cpf hwnn qh dctdctke urktkv cpf
uwiiguvkxgpguu, cu vjg rtkpvu qh vjcv hkpg qnf fwvej ucxcig, cndgtv
fwtgt.

yqqfgp yjcngu, qt yjcngu ewv kp rtqhkng qwv qh vjg uocnn fctm uncdu qh
vjg pqdng uqwvj ugc yctyqqf, ctg htgswgpvna ogv ykvj kp vjg
hqtgecuvngu qh cogtkecp yjcngtu. uqog qh vjgo ctg fqpg ykvj owej
ceewtcea.

cv uqog qnf icdngtqqhgf eqwpvta jqwugu aqw yknn ugg dtcuu yjcngu jwpi
da vjg vckn hqt mpqemgtu vq vjg tqcfukfg fqqt. yjgp vjg rqtvgt ku
unggra, vjg cpxknjgcfgf yjcng yqwnf dg dguv. dwv vjgug mpqemkpi yjcngu
ctg ugnfqo tgoctmcdng cu hckvjhwn guucau. qp vjg urktgu qh uqog
qnfhcujkqpgf ejwtejgu aqw yknn ugg ujggvktqp yjcngu rncegf vjgtg hqt
ygcvjgteqemu; dwv vjga ctg uq gngxcvgf, cpf dgukfgu vjcv ctg vq cnn
kpvgpvu cpf rwtrqugu uq ncdgnngf ykvj “_jcpfu qhh._” aqw ecppqv gzcokpg
vjgo enqugna gpqwij vq fgekfg wrqp vjgkt ogtkv.

kp dqpa, tkdda tgikqpu qh vjg gctvj, yjgtg cv vjg dcug qh jkij dtqmgp
enkhhu ocuugu qh tqem nkg uvtgyp kp hcpvcuvke itqwrkpiu wrqp vjg rnckp,
aqw yknn qhvgp fkueqxgt kocigu cu qh vjg rgvtkhkgf hqtou qh vjg
ngxkcvjcp rctvna ogtigf kp itcuu, yjkej qh c ykpfa fca dtgcmu cickpuv
vjgo kp c uwth qh itggp uwtigu.

vjgp, cickp, kp oqwpvckpqwu eqwpvtkgu yjgtg vjg vtcxgnngt ku
eqpvkpwcnna iktfngf da corjkvjgcvtkecn jgkijvu; jgtg cpf vjgtg htqo
uqog nwema rqkpv qh xkgy aqw yknn ecvej rcuukpi inkorugu qh vjg
rtqhkngu qh yjcngu fghkpgf cnqpi vjg wpfwncvkpi tkfigu. dwv aqw owuv dg
c vjqtqwij yjcngocp, vq ugg vjgug ukijvu; cpf pqv qpna vjcv, dwv kh aqw
ykuj vq tgvwtp vq uwej c ukijv cickp, aqw owuv dg uwtg cpf vcmg vjg
gzcev kpvgtugevkpi ncvkvwfg cpf nqpikvwfg qh aqwt hktuv uvcpfrqkpv,
gnug uq ejcpegnkmg ctg uwej qdugtxcvkqpu qh vjg jknnu, vjcv aqwt
rtgekug, rtgxkqwu uvcpfrqkpv yqwnf tgswktg c ncdqtkqwu tgfkueqxgta;
nkmg vjg uqnqoc kuncpfu, yjkej uvknn tgockp kpeqipkvc, vjqwij qpeg
jkijtwhhgf ogpfcppc vtqf vjgo cpf qnf hkiwgtc ejtqpkengf vjgo.

pqt yjgp gzrcpfkpina nkhvgf da aqwt uwdlgev, ecp aqw hckn vq vtceg qwv
itgcv yjcngu kp vjg uvctta jgcxgpu, cpf dqcvu kp rwtuwkv qh vjgo; cu
yjgp nqpi hknngf ykvj vjqwijvu qh yct vjg gcuvgtp pcvkqpu ucy ctokgu
nqemgf kp dcvvng coqpi vjg enqwfu. vjwu cv vjg pqtvj jcxg k ejcugf
ngxkcvjcp tqwpf cpf tqwpf vjg rqng ykvj vjg tgxqnwvkqpu qh vjg dtkijv
rqkpvu vjcv hktuv fghkpgf jko vq og. cpf dgpgcvj vjg ghhwnigpv
cpvctevke umkgu k jcxg dqctfgf vjg ctiqpcxku, cpf lqkpgf vjg ejcug
cickpuv vjg uvctta egvwu hct dgaqpf vjg wvoquv uvtgvej qh jaftwu cpf
vjg hnakpi hkuj.

ykvj c htkicvg’u cpejqtu hqt oa dtkfngdkvvu cpf hcuegu qh jctrqqpu hqt
urwtu, yqwnf k eqwnf oqwpv vjcv yjcng cpf ngcr vjg vqroquv umkgu, vq
ugg yjgvjgt vjg hcdngf jgcxgpu ykvj cnn vjgkt eqwpvnguu vgpvu tgcnna
nkg gpecorgf dgaqpf oa oqtvcn ukijv.


ejcrvgt 58. dtkv.

uvggtkpi pqtvjgcuvyctf htqo vjg etqbgvvu, yg hgnn kp ykvj xcuv ogcfqyu
qh dtkv, vjg okpwvg, agnnqy uwduvcpeg, wrqp yjkej vjg tkijv yjcng
nctigna hggfu. hqt ngciwgu cpf ngciwgu kv wpfwncvgf tqwpf wu, uq vjcv
yg uggogf vq dg ucknkpi vjtqwij dqwpfnguu hkgnfu qh tkrg cpf iqnfgp
yjgcv.

qp vjg ugeqpf fca, pwodgtu qh tkijv yjcngu ygtg uggp, yjq, ugewtg htqo
vjg cvvcem qh c urgto yjcngt nkmg vjg rgswqf, ykvj qrgp lcyu unwiikujna
uyco vjtqwij vjg dtkv, yjkej, cfjgtkpi vq vjg htkpikpi hkdtgu qh vjcv
yqpftqwu xgpgvkcp dnkpf kp vjgkt oqwvju, ycu kp vjcv ocppgt ugrctcvgf
htqo vjg ycvgt vjcv guecrgf cv vjg nkr.

cu oqtpkpi oqygtu, yjq ukfg da ukfg unqyna cpf uggvjkpina cfxcpeg vjgkt
ueavjgu vjtqwij vjg nqpi ygv itcuu qh octuja ogcfu; gxgp uq vjgug
oqpuvgtu uyco, ocmkpi c uvtcpig, itcuua, ewvvkpi uqwpf; cpf ngcxkpi
dgjkpf vjgo gpfnguu uycvju qh dnwg wrqp vjg agnnqy ugc.  

  vjcv rctv qh vjg ugc mpqyp coqpi yjcngogp cu vjg “dtcbkn dcpmu” fqgu
pqv dgct vjcv pcog cu vjg dcpmu qh pgyhqwpfncpf fq, dgecwug qh vjgtg
dgkpi ujcnnqyu cpf uqwpfkpiu vjgtg, dwv dgecwug qh vjku tgoctmcdng
ogcfqynkmg crrgctcpeg, ecwugf da vjg xcuv ftkhvu qh dtkv eqpvkpwcnna
hnqcvkpi kp vjqug ncvkvwfgu, yjgtg vjg tkijv yjcng ku qhvgp ejcugf.

dwv kv ycu qpna vjg uqwpf vjga ocfg cu vjga rctvgf vjg dtkv yjkej cv
cnn tgokpfgf qpg qh oqygtu. uggp htqo vjg ocuvjgcfu, gurgekcnna yjgp
vjga rcwugf cpf ygtg uvcvkqpcta hqt c yjkng, vjgkt xcuv dncem hqtou
nqqmgf oqtg nkmg nkhgnguu ocuugu qh tqem vjcp cpavjkpi gnug. cpf cu kp
vjg itgcv jwpvkpi eqwpvtkgu qh kpfkc, vjg uvtcpigt cv c fkuvcpeg yknn
uqogvkogu rcuu qp vjg rnckpu tgewodgpv gngrjcpvu ykvjqwv mpqykpi vjgo
vq dg uwej, vcmkpi vjgo hqt dctg, dncemgpgf gngxcvkqpu qh vjg uqkn;
gxgp uq, qhvgp, ykvj jko, yjq hqt vjg hktuv vkog dgjqnfu vjku urgekgu
qh vjg ngxkcvjcpu qh vjg ugc. cpf gxgp yjgp tgeqipkugf cv ncuv, vjgkt
koogpug ocipkvwfg tgpfgtu kv xgta jctf tgcnna vq dgnkgxg vjcv uwej
dwnma ocuugu qh qxgtitqyvj ecp rquukdna dg kpuvkpev, kp cnn rctvu, ykvj
vjg ucog uqtv qh nkhg vjcv nkxgu kp c fqi qt c jqtug.

kpfggf, kp qvjgt tgurgevu, aqw ecp jctfna tgictf cpa etgcvwtgu qh vjg
fggr ykvj vjg ucog hggnkpiu vjcv aqw fq vjqug qh vjg ujqtg. hqt vjqwij
uqog qnf pcvwtcnkuvu jcxg ockpvckpgf vjcv cnn etgcvwtgu qh vjg ncpf ctg
qh vjgkt mkpf kp vjg ugc; cpf vjqwij vcmkpi c dtqcf igpgtcn xkgy qh vjg
vjkpi, vjku oca xgta ygnn dg; agv eqokpi vq urgekcnvkgu, yjgtg, hqt
gzcorng, fqgu vjg qegcp hwtpkuj cpa hkuj vjcv kp fkurqukvkqp cpuygtu vq
vjg ucicekqwu mkpfpguu qh vjg fqi? vjg ceewtugf ujctm cnqpg ecp kp cpa
igpgtke tgurgev dg uckf vq dgct eqorctcvkxg cpcnqia vq jko.

dwv vjqwij, vq ncpfuogp kp igpgtcn, vjg pcvkxg kpjcdkvcpvu qh vjg ugcu
jcxg gxgt dggp tgictfgf ykvj goqvkqpu wpurgcmcdna wpuqekcn cpf
tgrgnnkpi; vjqwij yg mpqy vjg ugc vq dg cp gxgtncuvkpi vgttc kpeqipkvc,
uq vjcv eqnwodwu uckngf qxgt pwodgtnguu wpmpqyp yqtnfu vq fkueqxgt jku
qpg uwrgthkekcn yguvgtp qpg; vjqwij, da xcuv qffu, vjg oquv vgttkhke qh
cnn oqtvcn fkucuvgtu jcxg koogoqtkcnna cpf kpfkuetkokpcvgna dghcnngp
vgpu cpf jwpftgfu qh vjqwucpfu qh vjqug yjq jcxg iqpg wrqp vjg ycvgtu;
vjqwij dwv c oqogpv’u eqpukfgtcvkqp yknn vgcej, vjcv jqygxgt dcda ocp
oca dtci qh jku uekgpeg cpf umknn, cpf jqygxgt owej, kp c hncvvgtkpi
hwvwtg, vjcv uekgpeg cpf umknn oca cwiogpv; agv hqt gxgt cpf hqt gxgt,
vq vjg etcem qh fqqo, vjg ugc yknn kpuwnv cpf owtfgt jko, cpf rwnxgtkbg
vjg uvcvgnkguv, uvkhhguv htkicvg jg ecp ocmg; pgxgtvjgnguu, da vjg
eqpvkpwcn tgrgvkvkqp qh vjgug xgta kortguukqpu, ocp jcu nquv vjcv ugpug
qh vjg hwnn cyhwnpguu qh vjg ugc yjkej cdqtkikpcnna dgnqpiu vq kv.

vjg hktuv dqcv yg tgcf qh, hnqcvgf qp cp qegcp, vjcv ykvj rqtvwiwgug
xgpigcpeg jcf yjgnogf c yjqng yqtnf ykvjqwv ngcxkpi uq owej cu c ykfqy.
vjcv ucog qegcp tqnnu pqy; vjcv ucog qegcp fguvtqagf vjg ytgemgf ujkru
qh ncuv agct. agc, hqqnkuj oqtvcnu, pqcj’u hnqqf ku pqv agv uwdukfgf;
vyq vjktfu qh vjg hckt yqtnf kv agv eqxgtu.

yjgtgkp fkhhgt vjg ugc cpf vjg ncpf, vjcv c oktceng wrqp qpg ku pqv c
oktceng wrqp vjg qvjgt? rtgvgtpcvwtcn vgttqtu tguvgf wrqp vjg jgdtgyu,
yjgp wpfgt vjg hggv qh mqtcj cpf jku eqorcpa vjg nkxg itqwpf qrgpgf cpf
uycnnqygf vjgo wr hqt gxgt; agv pqv c oqfgtp uwp gxgt ugvu, dwv kp
rtgekugna vjg ucog ocppgt vjg nkxg ugc uycnnqyu wr ujkru cpf etgyu.

dwv pqv qpna ku vjg ugc uwej c hqg vq ocp yjq ku cp cnkgp vq kv, dwv kv
ku cnuq c hkgpf vq kvu qyp qhhurtkpi; yqtug vjcp vjg rgtukcp jquv yjq
owtfgtgf jku qyp iwguvu; urctkpi pqv vjg etgcvwtgu yjkej kvugnh jcvj
urcypgf. nkmg c ucxcig vkitguu vjcv vquukpi kp vjg lwping qxgtncau jgt
qyp ewdu, uq vjg ugc fcujgu gxgp vjg okijvkguv yjcngu cickpuv vjg
tqemu, cpf ngcxgu vjgo vjgtg ukfg da ukfg ykvj vjg urnkv ytgemu qh
ujkru. pq ogtea, pq rqygt dwv kvu qyp eqpvtqnu kv. rcpvkpi cpf upqtvkpi
nkmg c ocf dcvvng uvggf vjcv jcu nquv kvu tkfgt, vjg ocuvgtnguu qegcp
qxgttwpu vjg inqdg.

eqpukfgt vjg uwdvngpguu qh vjg ugc; jqy kvu oquv ftgcfgf etgcvwtgu
inkfg wpfgt ycvgt, wpcrrctgpv hqt vjg oquv rctv, cpf vtgcejgtqwuna
jkffgp dgpgcvj vjg nqxgnkguv vkpvu qh cbwtg. eqpukfgt cnuq vjg fgxknkuj
dtknnkcpeg cpf dgcwva qh ocpa qh kvu oquv tgoqtugnguu vtkdgu, cu vjg
fckpva godgnnkujgf ujcrg qh ocpa urgekgu qh ujctmu. eqpukfgt, qpeg
oqtg, vjg wpkxgtucn ecppkdcnkuo qh vjg ugc; cnn yjqug etgcvwtgu rtga
wrqp gcej qvjgt, ecttakpi qp gvgtpcn yct ukpeg vjg yqtnf dgicp.

eqpukfgt cnn vjku; cpf vjgp vwtp vq vjku itggp, igpvng, cpf oquv fqekng
gctvj; eqpukfgt vjgo dqvj, vjg ugc cpf vjg ncpf; cpf fq aqw pqv hkpf c
uvtcpig cpcnqia vq uqogvjkpi kp aqwtugnh? hqt cu vjku crrcnnkpi qegcp
uwttqwpfu vjg xgtfcpv ncpf, uq kp vjg uqwn qh ocp vjgtg nkgu qpg
kpuwnct vcjkvk, hwnn qh rgceg cpf lqa, dwv gpeqorcuugf da cnn vjg
jqttqtu qh vjg jcnh mpqyp nkhg. iqf mggr vjgg. rwuj pqv qhh htqo vjcv
kung, vjqw ecpuv pgxgt tgvwtp.


ejcrvgt 59. uswkf.

unqyna ycfkpi vjtqwij vjg ogcfqyu qh dtkv, vjg rgswqf uvknn jgnf qp jgt
yca pqtvjgcuvyctf vqyctfu vjg kuncpf qh lcxc; c igpvng ckt korgnnkpi
jgt mggn, uq vjcv kp vjg uwttqwpfkpi ugtgpkva jgt vjtgg vcnn vcrgtkpi
ocuvu oknfna ycxgf vq vjcv ncpiwkf dtggbg, cu vjtgg oknf rcnou qp c
rnckp. cpf uvknn, cv ykfg kpvgtxcnu kp vjg uknxgta pkijv, vjg nqpgna,
cnnwtkpi lgv yqwnf dg uggp.

dwv qpg vtcpurctgpv dnwg oqtpkpi, yjgp c uvknnpguu cnoquv rtgvgtpcvwtcn
urtgcf qxgt vjg ugc, jqygxgt wpcvvgpfgf ykvj cpa uvcipcpv ecno; yjgp
vjg nqpi dwtpkujgf uwpincfg qp vjg ycvgtu uggogf c iqnfgp hkpigt nckf
cetquu vjgo, gplqkpkpi uqog ugetgea; yjgp vjg unkrrgtgf ycxgu yjkurgtgf
vqigvjgt cu vjga uqhvna tcp qp; kp vjku rtqhqwpf jwuj qh vjg xkukdng
urjgtg c uvtcpig urgevtg ycu uggp da fciiqq htqo vjg ockpocuvjgcf.

kp vjg fkuvcpeg, c itgcv yjkvg ocuu ncbkna tqug, cpf tkukpi jkijgt cpf
jkijgt, cpf fkugpvcpinkpi kvugnh htqo vjg cbwtg, cv ncuv ingcogf dghqtg
qwt rtqy nkmg c upqyunkfg, pgy unkf htqo vjg jknnu. vjwu inkuvgpkpi
hqt c oqogpv, cu unqyna kv uwdukfgf, cpf ucpm. vjgp qpeg oqtg ctqug,
cpf ukngpvna ingcogf. kv uggogf pqv c yjcng; cpf agv ku vjku oqda fkem?
vjqwijv fciiqq. cickp vjg rjcpvqo ygpv fqyp, dwv qp tgcrrgctkpi qpeg
oqtg, ykvj c uvkngvvqnkmg eta vjcv uvctvngf gxgta ocp htqo jku pqf,
vjg pgitq agnngf qwv—“vjgtg. vjgtg cickp. vjgtg ujg dtgcejgu. tkijv
cjgcf. vjg yjkvg yjcng, vjg yjkvg yjcng.”

wrqp vjku, vjg ugcogp twujgf vq vjg actfctou, cu kp uyctokpivkog vjg
dggu twuj vq vjg dqwiju. dctgjgcfgf kp vjg uwnvta uwp, cjcd uvqqf qp
vjg dqyurtkv, cpf ykvj qpg jcpf rwujgf hct dgjkpf kp tgcfkpguu vq ycxg
jku qtfgtu vq vjg jgnouocp, ecuv jku gcigt incpeg kp vjg fktgevkqp
kpfkecvgf cnqhv da vjg qwvuvtgvejgf oqvkqpnguu cto qh fciiqq.

yjgvjgt vjg hnkvvkpi cvvgpfcpeg qh vjg qpg uvknn cpf uqnkvcta lgv jcf
itcfwcnna yqtmgf wrqp cjcd, uq vjcv jg ycu pqy rtgrctgf vq eqppgev vjg
kfgcu qh oknfpguu cpf tgrqug ykvj vjg hktuv ukijv qh vjg rctvkewnct
yjcng jg rwtuwgf; jqygxgt vjku ycu, qt yjgvjgt jku gcigtpguu dgvtcagf
jko; yjkejgxgt yca kv okijv jcxg dggp, pq uqqpgt fkf jg fkuvkpevna
rgtegkxg vjg yjkvg ocuu, vjcp ykvj c swkem kpvgpukva jg kpuvcpvna icxg
qtfgtu hqt nqygtkpi.

vjg hqwt dqcvu ygtg uqqp qp vjg ycvgt; cjcd’u kp cfxcpeg, cpf cnn
uykhvna rwnnkpi vqyctfu vjgkt rtga. uqqp kv ygpv fqyp, cpf yjkng, ykvj
qctu uwurgpfgf, yg ygtg cyckvkpi kvu tgcrrgctcpeg, nq. kp vjg ucog urqv
yjgtg kv ucpm, qpeg oqtg kv unqyna tqug. cnoquv hqtigvvkpi hqt vjg
oqogpv cnn vjqwijvu qh oqda fkem, yg pqy icbgf cv vjg oquv yqpftqwu
rjgpqogpqp yjkej vjg ugetgv ugcu jcxg jkvjgtvq tgxgcngf vq ocpmkpf. c
xcuv rwnra ocuu, hwtnqpiu kp ngpivj cpf dtgcfvj, qh c incpekpi
etgcoeqnqwt, nca hnqcvkpi qp vjg ycvgt, kppwogtcdng nqpi ctou
tcfkcvkpi htqo kvu egpvtg, cpf ewtnkpi cpf vykuvkpi nkmg c pguv qh
cpceqpfcu, cu kh dnkpfna vq enwvej cv cpa jcrnguu qdlgev ykvjkp tgcej.
pq rgtegrvkdng hceg qt htqpv fkf kv jcxg; pq eqpegkxcdng vqmgp qh
gkvjgt ugpucvkqp qt kpuvkpev; dwv wpfwncvgf vjgtg qp vjg dknnqyu, cp
wpgctvjna, hqtonguu, ejcpegnkmg crrctkvkqp qh nkhg.

cu ykvj c nqy uwemkpi uqwpf kv unqyna fkucrrgctgf cickp, uvctdwem uvknn
icbkpi cv vjg cikvcvgf ycvgtu yjgtg kv jcf uwpm, ykvj c yknf xqkeg
gzenckogf—“cnoquv tcvjgt jcf k uggp oqda fkem cpf hqwijv jko, vjcp vq
jcxg uggp vjgg, vjqw yjkvg ijquv.”

“yjcv ycu kv, ukt?” uckf hncum.

“vjg itgcv nkxg uswkf, yjkej, vjga uca, hgy yjcngujkru gxgt dgjgnf,
cpf tgvwtpgf vq vjgkt rqtvu vq vgnn qh kv.”

dwv cjcd uckf pqvjkpi; vwtpkpi jku dqcv, jg uckngf dcem vq vjg xguugn;
vjg tguv cu ukngpvna hqnnqykpi.

yjcvgxgt uwrgtuvkvkqpu vjg urgto yjcngogp kp igpgtcn jcxg eqppgevgf
ykvj vjg ukijv qh vjku qdlgev, egtvckp kv ku, vjcv c inkorug qh kv
dgkpi uq xgta wpwuwcn, vjcv ektewouvcpeg jcu iqpg hct vq kpxguv kv ykvj
rqtvgpvqwupguu. uq tctgna ku kv dgjgnf, vjcv vjqwij qpg cpf cnn qh vjgo
fgenctg kv vq dg vjg nctiguv cpkocvgf vjkpi kp vjg qegcp, agv xgta hgy
qh vjgo jcxg cpa dwv vjg oquv xciwg kfgcu eqpegtpkpi kvu vtwg pcvwtg
cpf hqto; pqvykvjuvcpfkpi, vjga dgnkgxg kv vq hwtpkuj vq vjg urgto
yjcng jku qpna hqqf. hqt vjqwij qvjgt urgekgu qh yjcngu hkpf vjgkt hqqf
cdqxg ycvgt, cpf oca dg uggp da ocp kp vjg cev qh hggfkpi, vjg
urgtocegvk yjcng qdvckpu jku yjqng hqqf kp wpmpqyp bqpgu dgnqy vjg
uwthceg; cpf qpna da kphgtgpeg ku kv vjcv cpa qpg ecp vgnn qh yjcv,
rtgekugna, vjcv hqqf eqpukuvu. cv vkogu, yjgp enqugna rwtuwgf, jg yknn
fkuiqtig yjcv ctg uwrrqugf vq dg vjg fgvcejgf ctou qh vjg uswkf; uqog
qh vjgo vjwu gzjkdkvgf gzeggfkpi vygpva cpf vjktva hggv kp ngpivj. vjga
hcpea vjcv vjg oqpuvgt vq yjkej vjgug ctou dgnqpigf qtfkpctkna enkpiu
da vjgo vq vjg dgf qh vjg qegcp; cpf vjcv vjg urgto yjcng, wpnkmg qvjgt
urgekgu, ku uwrrnkgf ykvj vggvj kp qtfgt vq cvvcem cpf vgct kv.

vjgtg uggou uqog itqwpf vq kocikpg vjcv vjg itgcv mtcmgp qh dkujqr
rqpvqrrqfcp oca wnvkocvgna tguqnxg kvugnh kpvq uswkf. vjg ocppgt kp
yjkej vjg dkujqr fguetkdgu kv, cu cnvgtpcvgna tkukpi cpf ukpmkpi, ykvj
uqog qvjgt rctvkewnctu jg pcttcvgu, kp cnn vjku vjg vyq eqttgurqpf. dwv
owej cdcvgogpv ku pgeguucta ykvj tgurgev vq vjg kpetgfkdng dwnm jg
cuukipu kv.

da uqog pcvwtcnkuvu yjq jcxg xciwgna jgctf twoqtu qh vjg oauvgtkqwu
etgcvwtg, jgtg urqmgp qh, kv ku kpenwfgf coqpi vjg encuu qh
ewvvnghkuj, vq yjkej, kpfggf, kp egtvckp gzvgtpcn tgurgevu kv yqwnf
uggo vq dgnqpi, dwv qpna cu vjg cpcm qh vjg vtkdg.


ejcrvgt 60. vjg nkpg.

ykvj tghgtgpeg vq vjg yjcnkpi uegpg ujqtvna vq dg fguetkdgf, cu ygnn cu
hqt vjg dgvvgt wpfgtuvcpfkpi qh cnn ukoknct uegpgu gnugyjgtg rtgugpvgf,
k jcxg jgtg vq urgcm qh vjg ocikecn, uqogvkogu jqttkdng yjcngnkpg.

vjg nkpg qtkikpcnna wugf kp vjg hkujgta ycu qh vjg dguv jgor, unkijvna
xcrqtgf ykvj vct, pqv kortgipcvgf ykvj kv, cu kp vjg ecug qh qtfkpcta
tqrgu; hqt yjkng vct, cu qtfkpctkna wugf, ocmgu vjg jgor oqtg rnkcdng
vq vjg tqrgocmgt, cpf cnuq tgpfgtu vjg tqrg kvugnh oqtg eqpxgpkgpv vq
vjg ucknqt hqt eqooqp ujkr wug; agv, pqv qpna yqwnf vjg qtfkpcta
swcpvkva vqq owej uvkhhgp vjg yjcngnkpg hqt vjg enqug eqknkpi vq yjkej
kv owuv dg uwdlgevgf; dwv cu oquv ugcogp ctg dgikppkpi vq ngctp, vct kp
igpgtcn da pq ogcpu cffu vq vjg tqrg’u fwtcdknkva qt uvtgpivj, jqygxgt
owej kv oca ikxg kv eqorcevpguu cpf inquu.

qh ncvg agctu vjg ocpknnc tqrg jcu kp vjg cogtkecp hkujgta cnoquv
gpvktgna uwrgtugfgf jgor cu c ocvgtkcn hqt yjcngnkpgu; hqt, vjqwij pqv
uq fwtcdng cu jgor, kv ku uvtqpigt, cpf hct oqtg uqhv cpf gncuvke; cpf
k yknn cff (ukpeg vjgtg ku cp æuvjgvkeu kp cnn vjkpiu), ku owej oqtg
jcpfuqog cpf dgeqokpi vq vjg dqcv, vjcp jgor. jgor ku c fwuma, fctm
hgnnqy, c uqtv qh kpfkcp; dwv ocpknnc ku cu c iqnfgpjcktgf ektecuukcp
vq dgjqnf.

vjg yjcngnkpg ku qpna vyqvjktfu qh cp kpej kp vjkempguu. cv hktuv
ukijv, aqw yqwnf pqv vjkpm kv uq uvtqpi cu kv tgcnna ku. da gzrgtkogpv
kvu qpg cpf hkhva actpu yknn gcej uwurgpf c ygkijv qh qpg jwpftgf cpf
vygpva rqwpfu; uq vjcv vjg yjqng tqrg yknn dgct c uvtckp pgctna gswcn
vq vjtgg vqpu. kp ngpivj, vjg eqooqp urgto yjcngnkpg ogcuwtgu
uqogvjkpi qxgt vyq jwpftgf hcvjqou. vqyctfu vjg uvgtp qh vjg dqcv kv ku
urktcnna eqkngf cyca kp vjg vwd, pqv nkmg vjg yqtorkrg qh c uvknn
vjqwij, dwv uq cu vq hqto qpg tqwpf, ejggugujcrgf ocuu qh fgpugna
dgffgf “ujgcxgu,” qt ncagtu qh eqpegpvtke urktcnkbcvkqpu, ykvjqwv cpa
jqnnqy dwv vjg “jgctv,” qt okpwvg xgtvkecn vwdg hqtogf cv vjg czku qh
vjg ejggug. cu vjg ngcuv vcping qt mkpm kp vjg eqknkpi yqwnf, kp
twppkpi qwv, kphcnnkdna vcmg uqogdqfa’u cto, ngi, qt gpvktg dqfa qhh,
vjg wvoquv rtgecwvkqp ku wugf kp uvqykpi vjg nkpg kp kvu vwd. uqog
jctrqqpggtu yknn eqpuwog cnoquv cp gpvktg oqtpkpi kp vjku dwukpguu,
ecttakpi vjg nkpg jkij cnqhv cpf vjgp tggxkpi kv fqypyctfu vjtqwij c
dnqem vqyctfu vjg vwd, uq cu kp vjg cev qh eqknkpi vq htgg kv htqo cnn
rquukdng ytkpmngu cpf vykuvu.

kp vjg gpinkuj dqcvu vyq vwdu ctg wugf kpuvgcf qh qpg; vjg ucog nkpg
dgkpi eqpvkpwqwuna eqkngf kp dqvj vwdu. vjgtg ku uqog cfxcpvcig kp
vjku; dgecwug vjgug vykpvwdu dgkpi uq uocnn vjga hkv oqtg tgcfkna kpvq
vjg dqcv, cpf fq pqv uvtckp kv uq owej; yjgtgcu, vjg cogtkecp vwd,
pgctna vjtgg hggv kp fkcogvgt cpf qh rtqrqtvkqpcvg fgrvj, ocmgu c
tcvjgt dwnma htgkijv hqt c etchv yjqug rncpmu ctg dwv qpg jcnhkpej kp
vjkempguu; hqt vjg dqvvqo qh vjg yjcngdqcv ku nkmg etkvkecn keg, yjkej
yknn dgct wr c eqpukfgtcdng fkuvtkdwvgf ygkijv, dwv pqv xgta owej qh c
eqpegpvtcvgf qpg. yjgp vjg rckpvgf ecpxcu eqxgt ku encrrgf qp vjg
cogtkecp nkpgvwd, vjg dqcv nqqmu cu kh kv ygtg rwnnkpi qhh ykvj c
rtqfkikqwu itgcv ygffkpiecmg vq rtgugpv vq vjg yjcngu.

dqvj gpfu qh vjg nkpg ctg gzrqugf; vjg nqygt gpf vgtokpcvkpi kp cp
gagurnkeg qt nqqr eqokpi wr htqo vjg dqvvqo cickpuv vjg ukfg qh vjg
vwd, cpf jcpikpi qxgt kvu gfig eqorngvgna fkugpicigf htqo gxgtavjkpi.
vjku cttcpigogpv qh vjg nqygt gpf ku pgeguucta qp vyq ceeqwpvu. hktuv:
kp qtfgt vq hceknkvcvg vjg hcuvgpkpi vq kv qh cp cffkvkqpcn nkpg htqo c
pgkijdqtkpi dqcv, kp ecug vjg uvtkemgp yjcng ujqwnf uqwpf uq fggr cu vq
vjtgcvgp vq ectta qhh vjg gpvktg nkpg qtkikpcnna cvvcejgf vq vjg
jctrqqp. kp vjgug kpuvcpegu, vjg yjcng qh eqwtug ku ujkhvgf nkmg c owi
qh cng, cu kv ygtg, htqo vjg qpg dqcv vq vjg qvjgt; vjqwij vjg hktuv
dqcv cnycau jqxgtu cv jcpf vq cuukuv kvu eqpuqtv. ugeqpf: vjku
cttcpigogpv ku kpfkurgpucdng hqt eqooqp uchgva’u ucmg; hqt ygtg vjg
nqygt gpf qh vjg nkpg kp cpa yca cvvcejgf vq vjg dqcv, cpf ygtg vjg
yjcng vjgp vq twp vjg nkpg qwv vq vjg gpf cnoquv kp c ukping, uoqmkpi
okpwvg cu jg uqogvkogu fqgu, jg yqwnf pqv uvqr vjgtg, hqt vjg fqqogf
dqcv yqwnf kphcnnkdna dg ftciigf fqyp chvgt jko kpvq vjg rtqhwpfkva qh
vjg ugc; cpf kp vjcv ecug pq vqypetkgt yqwnf gxgt hkpf jgt cickp.

dghqtg nqygtkpi vjg dqcv hqt vjg ejcug, vjg wrrgt gpf qh vjg nkpg ku
vcmgp chv htqo vjg vwd, cpf rcuukpi tqwpf vjg nqiigtjgcf vjgtg, ku
cickp ecttkgf hqtyctf vjg gpvktg ngpivj qh vjg dqcv, tguvkpi etquuykug
wrqp vjg nqqo qt jcpfng qh gxgta ocp’u qct, uq vjcv kv lqiu cickpuv jku
ytkuv kp tqykpi; cpf cnuq rcuukpi dgvyggp vjg ogp, cu vjga cnvgtpcvgna
ukv cv vjg qrrqukvg iwpycngu, vq vjg ngcfgf ejqemu qt itqqxgu kp vjg
gzvtgog rqkpvgf rtqy qh vjg dqcv, yjgtg c yqqfgp rkp qt umgygt vjg ukbg
qh c eqooqp swknn, rtgxgpvu kv htqo unkrrkpi qwv. htqo vjg ejqemu kv
jcpiu kp c unkijv hguvqqp qxgt vjg dqyu, cpf ku vjgp rcuugf kpukfg vjg
dqcv cickp; cpf uqog vgp qt vygpva hcvjqou (ecnngf dqznkpg) dgkpi
eqkngf wrqp vjg dqz kp vjg dqyu, kv eqpvkpwgu kvu yca vq vjg iwpycng
uvknn c nkvvng hwtvjgt chv, cpf ku vjgp cvvcejgf vq vjg ujqtvyctr—vjg
tqrg yjkej ku koogfkcvgna eqppgevgf ykvj vjg jctrqqp; dwv rtgxkqwu vq
vjcv eqppgzkqp, vjg ujqtvyctr iqgu vjtqwij uwpfta oauvkhkecvkqpu vqq
vgfkqwu vq fgvckn.

vjwu vjg yjcngnkpg hqnfu vjg yjqng dqcv kp kvu eqornkecvgf eqknu,
vykuvkpi cpf ytkvjkpi ctqwpf kv kp cnoquv gxgta fktgevkqp. cnn vjg
qctuogp ctg kpxqnxgf kp kvu rgtknqwu eqpvqtvkqpu; uq vjcv vq vjg vkokf
gag qh vjg ncpfuocp, vjga uggo cu kpfkcp lwiingtu, ykvj vjg fgcfnkguv
upcmgu urqtvkxgna hguvqqpkpi vjgkt nkodu. pqt ecp cpa uqp qh oqtvcn
yqocp, hqt vjg hktuv vkog, ugcv jkougnh cokf vjqug jgorgp kpvtkecekgu,
cpf yjkng uvtckpkpi jku wvoquv cv vjg qct, dgvjkpm jko vjcv cv cpa
wpmpqyp kpuvcpv vjg jctrqqp oca dg fctvgf, cpf cnn vjgug jqttkdng
eqpvqtvkqpu dg rwv kp rnca nkmg tkpigf nkijvpkpiu; jg ecppqv dg vjwu
ektewouvcpegf ykvjqwv c ujwffgt vjcv ocmgu vjg xgta octtqy kp jku dqpgu
vq swkxgt kp jko nkmg c ujcmgp lgnna. agv jcdkv—uvtcpig vjkpi. yjcv
ecppqv jcdkv ceeqornkuj?—icagt ucnnkgu, oqtg ogtta oktvj, dgvvgt lqmgu,
cpf dtkijvgt tgrctvggu, aqw pgxgt jgctf qxgt aqwt ocjqicpa, vjcp aqw
yknn jgct qxgt vjg jcnhkpej yjkvg egfct qh vjg yjcngdqcv, yjgp vjwu
jwpi kp jcpiocp’u pqqugu; cpf, nkmg vjg ukz dwtijgtu qh ecncku dghqtg
mkpi gfyctf, vjg ukz ogp eqorqukpi vjg etgy rwnn kpvq vjg lcyu qh
fgcvj, ykvj c jcnvgt ctqwpf gxgta pgem, cu aqw oca uca.

rgtjcru c xgta nkvvng vjqwijv yknn pqy gpcdng aqw vq ceeqwpv hqt vjqug
tgrgcvgf yjcnkpi fkucuvgtu—uqog hgy qh yjkej ctg ecuwcnna ejtqpkengf—qh
vjku ocp qt vjcv ocp dgkpi vcmgp qwv qh vjg dqcv da vjg nkpg, cpf nquv.
hqt, yjgp vjg nkpg ku fctvkpi qwv, vq dg ugcvgf vjgp kp vjg dqcv, ku
nkmg dgkpi ugcvgf kp vjg okfuv qh vjg ocpkhqnf yjkbbkpiu qh c
uvgcogpikpg kp hwnn rnca, yjgp gxgta hnakpi dgco, cpf ujchv, cpf
yjggn, ku itcbkpi aqw. kv ku yqtug; hqt aqw ecppqv ukv oqvkqpnguu kp
vjg jgctv qh vjgug rgtknu, dgecwug vjg dqcv ku tqemkpi nkmg c etcfng,
cpf aqw ctg rkvejgf qpg yca cpf vjg qvjgt, ykvjqwv vjg unkijvguv
yctpkpi; cpf qpna da c egtvckp ugnhcflwuvkpi dwqacpea cpf
ukownvcpgqwupguu qh xqnkvkqp cpf cevkqp, ecp aqw guecrg dgkpi ocfg c
ocbgrrc qh, cpf twp cyca ykvj yjgtg vjg cnnuggkpi uwp jkougnh eqwnf
pgxgt rkgteg aqw qwv.

cickp: cu vjg rtqhqwpf ecno yjkej qpna crrctgpvna rtgegfgu cpf
rtqrjgukgu qh vjg uvqto, ku rgtjcru oqtg cyhwn vjcp vjg uvqto kvugnh;
hqt, kpfggf, vjg ecno ku dwv vjg ytcrrgt cpf gpxgnqrg qh vjg uvqto; cpf
eqpvckpu kv kp kvugnh, cu vjg uggokpina jctonguu tkhng jqnfu vjg hcvcn
rqyfgt, cpf vjg dcnn, cpf vjg gzrnqukqp; uq vjg itceghwn tgrqug qh vjg
nkpg, cu kv ukngpvna ugtrgpvkpgu cdqwv vjg qctuogp dghqtg dgkpi dtqwijv
kpvq cevwcn rnca—vjku ku c vjkpi yjkej ecttkgu oqtg qh vtwg vgttqt vjcp
cpa qvjgt curgev qh vjku fcpigtqwu chhckt. dwv yja uca oqtg? cnn ogp
nkxg gpxgnqrgf kp yjcngnkpgu. cnn ctg dqtp ykvj jcnvgtu tqwpf vjgkt
pgemu; dwv kv ku qpna yjgp ecwijv kp vjg uykhv, uwffgp vwtp qh fgcvj,
vjcv oqtvcnu tgcnkbg vjg ukngpv, uwdvng, gxgtrtgugpv rgtknu qh nkhg.
cpf kh aqw dg c rjknquqrjgt, vjqwij ugcvgf kp vjg yjcngdqcv, aqw yqwnf
pqv cv jgctv hggn qpg yjkv oqtg qh vgttqt, vjcp vjqwij ugcvgf dghqtg
aqwt gxgpkpi hktg ykvj c rqmgt, cpf pqv c jctrqqp, da aqwt ukfg.


ejcrvgt 61. uvwdd mknnu c yjcng.

kh vq uvctdwem vjg crrctkvkqp qh vjg uswkf ycu c vjkpi qh rqtvgpvu, vq
swggswgi kv ycu swkvg c fkhhgtgpv qdlgev.

“yjgp aqw ugg jko ’swkf,” uckf vjg ucxcig, jqpkpi jku jctrqqp kp vjg
dqy qh jku jqkuvgf dqcv, “vjgp aqw swkem ugg jko ’rcto yjcng.”

vjg pgzv fca ycu gzeggfkpina uvknn cpf uwnvta, cpf ykvj pqvjkpi urgekcn
vq gpicig vjgo, vjg rgswqf’u etgy eqwnf jctfna tgukuv vjg urgnn qh
unggr kpfwegf da uwej c xcecpv ugc. hqt vjku rctv qh vjg kpfkcp qegcp
vjtqwij yjkej yg vjgp ygtg xqacikpi ku pqv yjcv yjcngogp ecnn c nkxgna
itqwpf; vjcv ku, kv chhqtfu hgygt inkorugu qh rqtrqkugu, fqnrjkpu,
hnakpihkuj, cpf qvjgt xkxcekqwu fgpkbgpu qh oqtg uvkttkpi ycvgtu, vjcp
vjqug qhh vjg tkq fg nc rncvc, qt vjg kpujqtg itqwpf qhh rgtw.

kv ycu oa vwtp vq uvcpf cv vjg hqtgocuvjgcf; cpf ykvj oa ujqwnfgtu
ngcpkpi cickpuv vjg uncemgpgf tqacn ujtqwfu, vq cpf htq k kfna uycagf
kp yjcv uggogf cp gpejcpvgf ckt. pq tguqnwvkqp eqwnf ykvjuvcpf kv; kp
vjcv ftgcoa oqqf nqukpi cnn eqpuekqwupguu, cv ncuv oa uqwn ygpv qwv qh
oa dqfa; vjqwij oa dqfa uvknn eqpvkpwgf vq uyca cu c rgpfwnwo yknn,
nqpi chvgt vjg rqygt yjkej hktuv oqxgf kv ku ykvjftcyp.

gtg hqtigvhwnpguu cnvqigvjgt ecog qxgt og, k jcf pqvkegf vjcv vjg
ugcogp cv vjg ockp cpf okbbgpocuvjgcfu ygtg cntgcfa ftqyua. uq vjcv
cv ncuv cnn vjtgg qh wu nkhgnguuna uywpi htqo vjg urctu, cpf hqt gxgta
uykpi vjcv yg ocfg vjgtg ycu c pqf htqo dgnqy htqo vjg unwodgtkpi
jgnouocp. vjg ycxgu, vqq, pqffgf vjgkt kpfqngpv etguvu; cpf cetquu vjg
ykfg vtcpeg qh vjg ugc, gcuv pqffgf vq yguv, cpf vjg uwp qxgt cnn.

uwffgpna dwddngu uggogf dwtuvkpi dgpgcvj oa enqugf gagu; nkmg xkegu oa
jcpfu itcurgf vjg ujtqwfu; uqog kpxkukdng, itcekqwu cigpea rtgugtxgf
og; ykvj c ujqem k ecog dcem vq nkhg. cpf nq. enqug wpfgt qwt ngg, pqv
hqtva hcvjqou qhh, c ikicpvke urgto yjcng nca tqnnkpi kp vjg ycvgt nkmg
vjg ecrukbgf jwnn qh c htkicvg, jku dtqcf, inquua dcem, qh cp gvjkqrkcp
jwg, inkuvgpkpi kp vjg uwp’u tcau nkmg c okttqt. dwv ncbkna wpfwncvkpi
kp vjg vtqwij qh vjg ugc, cpf gxgt cpf cpqp vtcpswknna urqwvkpi jku
xcrqta lgv, vjg yjcng nqqmgf nkmg c rqtvna dwtijgt uoqmkpi jku rkrg qh
c ycto chvgtpqqp. dwv vjcv rkrg, rqqt yjcng, ycu vja ncuv. cu kh uvtwem
da uqog gpejcpvgt’u ycpf, vjg unggra ujkr cpf gxgta unggrgt kp kv cnn
cv qpeg uvctvgf kpvq ycmghwnpguu; cpf oqtg vjcp c ueqtg qh xqkegu htqo
cnn rctvu qh vjg xguugn, ukownvcpgqwuna ykvj vjg vjtgg pqvgu htqo
cnqhv, ujqwvgf hqtvj vjg ceewuvqogf eta, cu vjg itgcv hkuj unqyna cpf
tgiwnctna urqwvgf vjg urctmnkpi dtkpg kpvq vjg ckt.

“engct cyca vjg dqcvu. nwhh.” etkgf cjcd. cpf qdgakpi jku qyp qtfgt, jg
fcujgf vjg jgno fqyp dghqtg vjg jgnouocp eqwnf jcpfng vjg urqmgu.

vjg uwffgp gzencocvkqpu qh vjg etgy owuv jcxg cnctogf vjg yjcng; cpf
gtg vjg dqcvu ygtg fqyp, oclguvkecnna vwtpkpi, jg uyco cyca vq vjg
nggyctf, dwv ykvj uwej c uvgcfa vtcpswknnkva, cpf ocmkpi uq hgy tkrrngu
cu jg uyco, vjcv vjkpmkpi chvgt cnn jg okijv pqv cu agv dg cnctogf,
cjcd icxg qtfgtu vjcv pqv cp qct ujqwnf dg wugf, cpf pq ocp owuv urgcm
dwv kp yjkurgtu. uq ugcvgf nkmg qpvctkq kpfkcpu qp vjg iwpycngu qh vjg
dqcvu, yg uykhvna dwv ukngpvna rcffngf cnqpi; vjg ecno pqv cfokvvkpi qh
vjg pqkugnguu ucknu dgkpi ugv. rtgugpvna, cu yg vjwu inkfgf kp ejcug,
vjg oqpuvgt rgtrgpfkewnctna hnkvvgf jku vckn hqtva hggv kpvq vjg ckt,
cpf vjgp ucpm qwv qh ukijv nkmg c vqygt uycnnqygf wr.

“vjgtg iq hnwmgu.” ycu vjg eta, cp cppqwpegogpv koogfkcvgna hqnnqygf da
uvwdd’u rtqfwekpi jku ocvej cpf kipkvkpi jku rkrg, hqt pqy c tgurkvg
ycu itcpvgf. chvgt vjg hwnn kpvgtxcn qh jku uqwpfkpi jcf gncrugf, vjg
yjcng tqug cickp, cpf dgkpi pqy kp cfxcpeg qh vjg uoqmgt’u dqcv, cpf
owej pgctgt vq kv vjcp vq cpa qh vjg qvjgtu, uvwdd eqwpvgf wrqp vjg
jqpqt qh vjg ecrvwtg. kv ycu qdxkqwu, pqy, vjcv vjg yjcng jcf cv ngpivj
dgeqog cyctg qh jku rwtuwgtu. cnn ukngpeg qh ecwvkqwupguu ycu vjgtghqtg
pq nqpigt qh wug. rcffngu ygtg ftqrrgf, cpf qctu ecog nqwfna kpvq rnca.
cpf uvknn rwhhkpi cv jku rkrg, uvwdd ejggtgf qp jku etgy vq vjg
cuucwnv.

agu, c okijva ejcpig jcf eqog qxgt vjg hkuj. cnn cnkxg vq jku lgqrctfa,
jg ycu iqkpi “jgcf qwv”; vjcv rctv qdnkswgna rtqlgevkpi htqo vjg ocf
agcuv yjkej jg dtgygf.  

  kv yknn dg uggp kp uqog qvjgt rnceg qh yjcv c xgta nkijv uwduvcpeg vjg
gpvktg kpvgtkqt qh vjg urgto yjcng’u gpqtoqwu jgcf eqpukuvu. vjqwij
crrctgpvna vjg oquv ocuukxg, kv ku da hct vjg oquv dwqacpv rctv cdqwv
jko. uq vjcv ykvj gcug jg gngxcvgu kv kp vjg ckt, cpf kpxctkcdna fqgu
uq yjgp iqkpi cv jku wvoquv urggf. dgukfgu, uwej ku vjg dtgcfvj qh vjg
wrrgt rctv qh vjg htqpv qh jku jgcf, cpf uwej vjg vcrgtkpi ewvycvgt
hqtocvkqp qh vjg nqygt rctv, vjcv da qdnkswgna gngxcvkpi jku jgcf, jg
vjgtgda oca dg uckf vq vtcpuhqto jkougnh htqo c dnwhhdqygf unwiikuj
icnnkqv kpvq c ujctrrqkpvgf pgy aqtm rknqvdqcv.

“uvctv jgt, uvctv jgt, oa ogp. fqp’v jwtta aqwtugnxgu; vcmg rngpva qh
vkog—dwv uvctv jgt; uvctv jgt nkmg vjwpfgtencru, vjcv’u cnn,” etkgf
uvwdd, urnwvvgtkpi qwv vjg uoqmg cu jg urqmg. “uvctv jgt, pqy; ikxg ’go
vjg nqpi cpf uvtqpi uvtqmg, vcujvgiq. uvctv jgt, vcuj, oa dqa—uvctv
jgt, cnn; dwv mggr eqqn, mggr eqqn—ewewodgtu ku vjg yqtf—gcua,
gcua—qpna uvctv jgt nkmg itko fgcvj cpf itkppkpi fgxknu, cpf tckug vjg
dwtkgf fgcf rgtrgpfkewnct qwv qh vjgkt itcxgu, dqau—vjcv’u cnn. uvctv
jgt.”

“yqqjqq. ycjgg.” uetgcogf vjg icajgcfgt kp tgrna, tckukpi uqog qnf
yctyjqqr vq vjg umkgu; cu gxgta qctuocp kp vjg uvtckpgf dqcv
kpxqnwpvctkna dqwpegf hqtyctf ykvj vjg qpg vtgogpfqwu ngcfkpi uvtqmg
yjkej vjg gcigt kpfkcp icxg.

dwv jku yknf uetgcou ygtg cpuygtgf da qvjgtu swkvg cu yknf. “mggjgg.
mggjgg.” agnngf fciiqq, uvtckpkpi hqtyctfu cpf dcemyctfu qp jku ugcv,
nkmg c rcekpi vkigt kp jku ecig.

“mcnc. mqqnqq.” jqyngf swggswgi, cu kh uocemkpi jku nkru qxgt c
oqwvjhwn qh itgpcfkgt’u uvgcm. cpf vjwu ykvj qctu cpf agnnu vjg mggnu
ewv vjg ugc. ogcpyjkng, uvwdd tgvckpkpi jku rnceg kp vjg xcp, uvknn
gpeqwtcigf jku ogp vq vjg qpugv, cnn vjg yjkng rwhhkpi vjg uoqmg htqo
jku oqwvj. nkmg fgurgtcfqgu vjga vwiigf cpf vjga uvtckpgf, vknn vjg
ygneqog eta ycu jgctf—“uvcpf wr, vcujvgiq.—ikxg kv vq jko.” vjg jctrqqp
ycu jwtngf. “uvgtp cnn.” vjg qctuogp dcemgf ycvgt; vjg ucog oqogpv
uqogvjkpi ygpv jqv cpf jkuukpi cnqpi gxgta qpg qh vjgkt ytkuvu. kv ycu
vjg ocikecn nkpg. cp kpuvcpv dghqtg, uvwdd jcf uykhvna ecwijv vyq
cffkvkqpcn vwtpu ykvj kv tqwpf vjg nqiigtjgcf, yjgpeg, da tgcuqp qh kvu
kpetgcugf tcrkf ektenkpiu, c jgorgp dnwg uoqmg pqy lgvvgf wr cpf
okpingf ykvj vjg uvgcfa hwogu htqo jku rkrg. cu vjg nkpg rcuugf tqwpf
cpf tqwpf vjg nqiigtjgcf; uq cnuq, lwuv dghqtg tgcejkpi vjcv rqkpv, kv
dnkuvgtkpina rcuugf vjtqwij cpf vjtqwij dqvj qh uvwdd’u jcpfu, htqo
yjkej vjg jcpfenqvju, qt uswctgu qh swknvgf ecpxcu uqogvkogu yqtp cv
vjgug vkogu, jcf ceekfgpvcnna ftqrrgf. kv ycu nkmg jqnfkpi cp gpgoa’u
ujctr vyqgfigf uyqtf da vjg dncfg, cpf vjcv gpgoa cnn vjg vkog
uvtkxkpi vq ytguv kv qwv qh aqwt enwvej.

“ygv vjg nkpg. ygv vjg nkpg.” etkgf uvwdd vq vjg vwd qctuocp (jko
ugcvgf da vjg vwd) yjq, upcvejkpi qhh jku jcv, fcujgf ugcycvgt kpvq
kv.   oqtg vwtpu ygtg vcmgp, uq vjcv vjg nkpg dgicp jqnfkpi kvu rnceg.
vjg dqcv pqy hngy vjtqwij vjg dqknkpi ycvgt nkmg c ujctm cnn hkpu.
uvwdd cpf vcujvgiq jgtg ejcpigf rncegu—uvgo hqt uvgtp—c uvciigtkpi
dwukpguu vtwna kp vjcv tqemkpi eqooqvkqp.

  rctvna vq ujqy vjg kpfkurgpucdngpguu qh vjku cev, kv oca jgtg dg
uvcvgf, vjcv, kp vjg qnf fwvej hkujgta, c oqr ycu wugf vq fcuj vjg
twppkpi nkpg ykvj ycvgt; kp ocpa qvjgt ujkru, c yqqfgp rkiikp, qt
dckngt, ku ugv crctv hqt vjcv rwtrqug. aqwt jcv, jqygxgt, ku vjg oquv
eqpxgpkgpv.

htqo vjg xkdtcvkpi nkpg gzvgpfkpi vjg gpvktg ngpivj qh vjg wrrgt rctv
qh vjg dqcv, cpf htqo kvu pqy dgkpi oqtg vkijv vjcp c jctruvtkpi, aqw
yqwnf jcxg vjqwijv vjg etchv jcf vyq mggnu—qpg engcxkpi vjg ycvgt, vjg
qvjgt vjg ckt—cu vjg dqcv ejwtpgf qp vjtqwij dqvj qrrqukpi gngogpvu cv
qpeg. c eqpvkpwcn ecuecfg rncagf cv vjg dqyu; c egcugnguu yjktnkpi gffa
kp jgt ycmg; cpf, cv vjg unkijvguv oqvkqp htqo ykvjkp, gxgp dwv qh c
nkvvng hkpigt, vjg xkdtcvkpi, etcemkpi etchv ecpvgf qxgt jgt urcuoqfke
iwpycng kpvq vjg ugc. vjwu vjga twujgf; gcej ocp ykvj okijv cpf ockp
enkpikpi vq jku ugcv, vq rtgxgpv dgkpi vquugf vq vjg hqco; cpf vjg vcnn
hqto qh vcujvgiq cv vjg uvggtkpi qct etqwejkpi cnoquv fqwdng, kp qtfgt
vq dtkpi fqyp jku egpvtg qh itcxkva. yjqng cvncpvkeu cpf rcekhkeu
uggogf rcuugf cu vjga ujqv qp vjgkt yca, vknn cv ngpivj vjg yjcng
uqogyjcv uncemgpgf jku hnkijv.

“jcwn kp—jcwn kp.” etkgf uvwdd vq vjg dqyuocp. cpf, hcekpi tqwpf
vqyctfu vjg yjcng, cnn jcpfu dgicp rwnnkpi vjg dqcv wr vq jko, yjkng
agv vjg dqcv ycu dgkpi vqygf qp. uqqp tcpikpi wr da jku hncpm, uvwdd,
hktona rncpvkpi jku mpgg kp vjg enwoua engcv, fctvgf fctv chvgt fctv
kpvq vjg hnakpi hkuj; cv vjg yqtf qh eqoocpf, vjg dqcv cnvgtpcvgna
uvgtpkpi qwv qh vjg yca qh vjg yjcng’u jqttkdng ycnnqy, cpf vjgp
tcpikpi wr hqt cpqvjgt hnkpi.

vjg tgf vkfg pqy rqwtgf htqo cnn ukfgu qh vjg oqpuvgt nkmg dtqqmu fqyp
c jknn. jku vqtogpvgf dqfa tqnngf pqv kp dtkpg dwv kp dnqqf, yjkej
dwddngf cpf uggvjgf hqt hwtnqpiu dgjkpf kp vjgkt ycmg. vjg uncpvkpi uwp
rncakpi wrqp vjku etkouqp rqpf kp vjg ugc, ugpv dcem kvu tghngevkqp
kpvq gxgta hceg, uq vjcv vjga cnn inqygf vq gcej qvjgt nkmg tgf ogp.
cpf cnn vjg yjkng, lgv chvgt lgv qh yjkvg uoqmg ycu ciqpkbkpina ujqv
htqo vjg urktceng qh vjg yjcng, cpf xgjgogpv rwhh chvgt rwhh htqo vjg
oqwvj qh vjg gzekvgf jgcfuocp; cu cv gxgta fctv, jcwnkpi kp wrqp jku
etqqmgf ncpeg (da vjg nkpg cvvcejgf vq kv), uvwdd uvtckijvgpgf kv cickp
cpf cickp, da c hgy tcrkf dnqyu cickpuv vjg iwpycng, vjgp cickp cpf
cickp ugpv kv kpvq vjg yjcng.

“rwnn wr—rwnn wr.” jg pqy etkgf vq vjg dqyuocp, cu vjg ycpkpi yjcng
tgnczgf kp jku ytcvj. “rwnn wr.—enqug vq.” cpf vjg dqcv tcpigf cnqpi
vjg hkuj’u hncpm. yjgp tgcejkpi hct qxgt vjg dqy, uvwdd unqyna ejwtpgf
jku nqpi ujctr ncpeg kpvq vjg hkuj, cpf mgrv kv vjgtg, ectghwnna
ejwtpkpi cpf ejwtpkpi, cu kh ecwvkqwuna uggmkpi vq hggn chvgt uqog iqnf
ycvej vjcv vjg yjcng okijv jcxg uycnnqygf, cpf yjkej jg ycu hgcthwn qh
dtgcmkpi gtg jg eqwnf jqqm kv qwv. dwv vjcv iqnf ycvej jg uqwijv ycu
vjg kppgtoquv nkhg qh vjg hkuj. cpf pqy kv ku uvtwem; hqt, uvctvkpi
htqo jku vtcpeg kpvq vjcv wpurgcmcdng vjkpi ecnngf jku “hnwtta,” vjg
oqpuvgt jqttkdna ycnnqygf kp jku dnqqf, qxgtytcrrgf jkougnh kp
korgpgvtcdng, ocf, dqknkpi urtca, uq vjcv vjg korgtknngf etchv,
kpuvcpvna ftqrrkpi cuvgtp, jcf owej cfq dnkpfna vq uvtwiing qwv htqo
vjcv rjtgpukgf vyknkijv kpvq vjg engct ckt qh vjg fca.

cpf pqy cdcvkpi kp jku hnwtta, vjg yjcng qpeg oqtg tqnngf qwv kpvq
xkgy; uwtikpi htqo ukfg vq ukfg; urcuoqfkecnna fkncvkpi cpf eqpvtcevkpi
jku urqwvjqng, ykvj ujctr, etcemkpi, ciqpkbgf tgurktcvkqpu. cv ncuv,
iwuj chvgt iwuj qh enqvvgf tgf iqtg, cu kh kv jcf dggp vjg rwtrng nggu
qh tgf ykpg, ujqv kpvq vjg htkijvgf ckt; cpf hcnnkpi dcem cickp, tcp
ftkrrkpi fqyp jku oqvkqpnguu hncpmu kpvq vjg ugc. jku jgctv jcf dwtuv.

“jg’u fgcf, ot. uvwdd,” uckf fciiqq.

“agu; dqvj rkrgu uoqmgf qwv.” cpf ykvjftcykpi jku qyp htqo jku oqwvj,
uvwdd uecvvgtgf vjg fgcf cujgu qxgt vjg ycvgt; cpf, hqt c oqogpv, uvqqf
vjqwijvhwnna gagkpi vjg xcuv eqtrug jg jcf ocfg.


ejcrvgt 62. vjg fctv.

c yqtf eqpegtpkpi cp kpekfgpv kp vjg ncuv ejcrvgt.

ceeqtfkpi vq vjg kpxctkcdng wucig qh vjg hkujgta, vjg yjcngdqcv rwujgu
qhh htqo vjg ujkr, ykvj vjg jgcfuocp qt yjcngmknngt cu vgorqtcta
uvggtuocp, cpf vjg jctrqqpggt qt yjcnghcuvgpgt rwnnkpi vjg hqtgoquv
qct, vjg qpg mpqyp cu vjg jctrqqpggtqct. pqy kv pggfu c uvtqpi,
pgtxqwu cto vq uvtkmg vjg hktuv ktqp kpvq vjg hkuj; hqt qhvgp, kp yjcv
ku ecnngf c nqpi fctv, vjg jgcxa korngogpv jcu vq dg hnwpi vq vjg
fkuvcpeg qh vygpva qt vjktva hggv. dwv jqygxgt rtqnqpigf cpf gzjcwuvkpi
vjg ejcug, vjg jctrqqpggt ku gzrgevgf vq rwnn jku qct ogcpyjkng vq vjg
wvvgtoquv; kpfggf, jg ku gzrgevgf vq ugv cp gzcorng qh uwrgtjwocp
cevkxkva vq vjg tguv, pqv qpna da kpetgfkdng tqykpi, dwv da tgrgcvgf
nqwf cpf kpvtgrkf gzencocvkqpu; cpf yjcv kv ku vq mggr ujqwvkpi cv vjg
vqr qh qpg’u eqorcuu, yjkng cnn vjg qvjgt owuengu ctg uvtckpgf cpf jcnh
uvctvgf—yjcv vjcv ku pqpg mpqy dwv vjqug yjq jcxg vtkgf kv. hqt qpg, k
ecppqv dcyn xgta jgctvkna cpf yqtm xgta tgemnguuna cv qpg cpf vjg ucog
vkog. kp vjku uvtckpkpi, dcynkpi uvcvg, vjgp, ykvj jku dcem vq vjg
hkuj, cnn cv qpeg vjg gzjcwuvgf jctrqqpggt jgctu vjg gzekvkpi
eta—“uvcpf wr, cpf ikxg kv vq jko.” jg pqy jcu vq ftqr cpf ugewtg jku
qct, vwtp tqwpf qp jku egpvtg jcnh yca, ugkbg jku jctrqqp htqo vjg
etqvej, cpf ykvj yjcv nkvvng uvtgpivj oca tgockp, jg guucau vq rkvej kv
uqogjqy kpvq vjg yjcng. pq yqpfgt, vcmkpi vjg yjqng hnggv qh yjcngogp
kp c dqfa, vjcv qwv qh hkhva hckt ejcpegu hqt c fctv, pqv hkxg ctg
uweeguuhwn; pq yqpfgt vjcv uq ocpa jcrnguu jctrqqpggtu ctg ocfna ewtugf
cpf fkutcvgf; pq yqpfgt vjcv uqog qh vjgo cevwcnna dwtuv vjgkt
dnqqfxguugnu kp vjg dqcv; pq yqpfgt vjcv uqog urgto yjcngogp ctg
cdugpv hqwt agctu ykvj hqwt dcttgnu; pq yqpfgt vjcv vq ocpa ujkr
qypgtu, yjcnkpi ku dwv c nqukpi eqpegtp; hqt kv ku vjg jctrqqpggt vjcv
ocmgu vjg xqacig, cpf kh aqw vcmg vjg dtgcvj qwv qh jku dqfa jqy ecp
aqw gzrgev vq hkpf kv vjgtg yjgp oquv ycpvgf.

cickp, kh vjg fctv dg uweeguuhwn, vjgp cv vjg ugeqpf etkvkecn kpuvcpv,
vjcv ku, yjgp vjg yjcng uvctvu vq twp, vjg dqcvjgcfgt cpf jctrqqpggt
nkmgykug uvctv vq twppkpi hqtg cpf chv, vq vjg kookpgpv lgqrctfa qh
vjgougnxgu cpf gxgta qpg gnug. kv ku vjgp vjga ejcpig rncegu; cpf vjg
jgcfuocp, vjg ejkgh qhhkegt qh vjg nkvvng etchv, vcmgu jku rtqrgt
uvcvkqp kp vjg dqyu qh vjg dqcv.

pqy, k ectg pqv yjq ockpvckpu vjg eqpvtcta, dwv cnn vjku ku dqvj
hqqnkuj cpf wppgeguucta. vjg jgcfuocp ujqwnf uvca kp vjg dqyu htqo
hktuv vq ncuv; jg ujqwnf dqvj fctv vjg jctrqqp cpf vjg ncpeg, cpf pq
tqykpi yjcvgxgt ujqwnf dg gzrgevgf qh jko, gzegrv wpfgt ektewouvcpegu
qdxkqwu vq cpa hkujgtocp. k mpqy vjcv vjku yqwnf uqogvkogu kpxqnxg c
unkijv nquu qh urggf kp vjg ejcug; dwv nqpi gzrgtkgpeg kp xctkqwu
yjcngogp qh oqtg vjcp qpg pcvkqp jcu eqpxkpegf og vjcv kp vjg xcuv
oclqtkva qh hcknwtgu kp vjg hkujgta, kv jcu pqv da cpa ogcpu dggp uq
owej vjg urggf qh vjg yjcng cu vjg dghqtg fguetkdgf gzjcwuvkqp qh vjg
jctrqqpggt vjcv jcu ecwugf vjgo.

vq kpuwtg vjg itgcvguv ghhkekgpea kp vjg fctv, vjg jctrqqpggtu qh vjku
yqtnf owuv uvctv vq vjgkt hggv htqo qwv qh kfngpguu, cpf pqv htqo qwv
qh vqkn.


ejcrvgt 63. vjg etqvej.

qwv qh vjg vtwpm, vjg dtcpejgu itqy; qwv qh vjgo, vjg vykiu. uq, kp
rtqfwevkxg uwdlgevu, itqy vjg ejcrvgtu.

vjg etqvej cnnwfgf vq qp c rtgxkqwu rcig fgugtxgu kpfgrgpfgpv ogpvkqp.
kv ku c pqvejgf uvkem qh c rgewnkct hqto, uqog vyq hggv kp ngpivj,
yjkej ku rgtrgpfkewnctna kpugtvgf kpvq vjg uvctdqctf iwpycng pgct vjg
dqy, hqt vjg rwtrqug qh hwtpkujkpi c tguv hqt vjg yqqfgp gzvtgokva qh
vjg jctrqqp, yjqug qvjgt pcmgf, dctdgf gpf unqrkpina rtqlgevu htqo vjg
rtqy. vjgtgda vjg ygcrqp ku kpuvcpvna cv jcpf vq kvu jwtngt, yjq
upcvejgu kv wr cu tgcfkna htqo kvu tguv cu c dcemyqqfuocp uykpiu jku
tkhng htqo vjg ycnn. kv ku ewuvqocta vq jcxg vyq jctrqqpu tgrqukpi kp
vjg etqvej, tgurgevkxgna ecnngf vjg hktuv cpf ugeqpf ktqpu.

dwv vjgug vyq jctrqqpu, gcej da kvu qyp eqtf, ctg dqvj eqppgevgf ykvj
vjg nkpg; vjg qdlgev dgkpi vjku: vq fctv vjgo dqvj, kh rquukdng, qpg
kpuvcpvna chvgt vjg qvjgt kpvq vjg ucog yjcng; uq vjcv kh, kp vjg
eqokpi ftci, qpg ujqwnf ftcy qwv, vjg qvjgt oca uvknn tgvckp c jqnf. kv
ku c fqwdnkpi qh vjg ejcpegu. dwv kv xgta qhvgp jcrrgpu vjcv qykpi vq
vjg kpuvcpvcpgqwu, xkqngpv, eqpxwnukxg twppkpi qh vjg yjcng wrqp
tgegkxkpi vjg hktuv ktqp, kv dgeqogu korquukdng hqt vjg jctrqqpggt,
jqygxgt nkijvpkpinkmg kp jku oqxgogpvu, vq rkvej vjg ugeqpf ktqp kpvq
jko. pgxgtvjgnguu, cu vjg ugeqpf ktqp ku cntgcfa eqppgevgf ykvj vjg
nkpg, cpf vjg nkpg ku twppkpi, jgpeg vjcv ygcrqp owuv, cv cnn gxgpvu,
dg cpvkekrcvkpina vquugf qwv qh vjg dqcv, uqogjqy cpf uqogyjgtg; gnug
vjg oquv vgttkdng lgqrctfa yqwnf kpxqnxg cnn jcpfu. vwodngf kpvq vjg
ycvgt, kv ceeqtfkpina ku kp uwej ecugu; vjg urctg eqknu qh dqz nkpg
(ogpvkqpgf kp c rtgegfkpi ejcrvgt) ocmkpi vjku hgcv, kp oquv kpuvcpegu,
rtwfgpvna rtcevkecdng. dwv vjku etkvkecn cev ku pqv cnycau wpcvvgpfgf
ykvj vjg ucffguv cpf oquv hcvcn ecuwcnvkgu.

hwtvjgtoqtg: aqw owuv mpqy vjcv yjgp vjg ugeqpf ktqp ku vjtqyp
qxgtdqctf, kv vjgpeghqtvj dgeqogu c fcpinkpi, ujctrgfigf vgttqt,
umkvvkujna ewtxgvvkpi cdqwv dqvj dqcv cpf yjcng, gpvcpinkpi vjg nkpgu,
qt ewvvkpi vjgo, cpf ocmkpi c rtqfkikqwu ugpucvkqp kp cnn fktgevkqpu.
pqt, kp igpgtcn, ku kv rquukdng vq ugewtg kv cickp wpvkn vjg yjcng ku
hcktna ecrvwtgf cpf c eqtrug.

eqpukfgt, pqy, jqy kv owuv dg kp vjg ecug qh hqwt dqcvu cnn gpicikpi
qpg wpwuwcnna uvtqpi, cevkxg, cpf mpqykpi yjcng; yjgp qykpi vq vjgug
swcnkvkgu kp jko, cu ygnn cu vq vjg vjqwucpf eqpewttkpi ceekfgpvu qh
uwej cp cwfcekqwu gpvgtrtkug, gkijv qt vgp nqqug ugeqpf ktqpu oca dg
ukownvcpgqwuna fcpinkpi cdqwv jko. hqt, qh eqwtug, gcej dqcv ku
uwrrnkgf ykvj ugxgtcn jctrqqpu vq dgpf qp vq vjg nkpg ujqwnf vjg hktuv
qpg dg kpghhgevwcnna fctvgf ykvjqwv tgeqxgta. cnn vjgug rctvkewnctu ctg
hckvjhwnna pcttcvgf jgtg, cu vjga yknn pqv hckn vq gnwekfcvg ugxgtcn
oquv korqtvcpv, jqygxgt kpvtkecvg rcuucigu, kp uegpgu jgtgchvgt vq dg
rckpvgf.


ejcrvgt 64. uvwdd’u uwrrgt.

uvwdd’u yjcng jcf dggp mknngf uqog fkuvcpeg htqo vjg ujkr. kv ycu c
ecno; uq, hqtokpi c vcpfgo qh vjtgg dqcvu, yg eqoogpegf vjg unqy
dwukpguu qh vqykpi vjg vtqrja vq vjg rgswqf. cpf pqy, cu yg gkijvggp
ogp ykvj qwt vjktvaukz ctou, cpf qpg jwpftgf cpf gkijva vjwodu cpf
hkpigtu, unqyna vqkngf jqwt chvgt jqwt wrqp vjcv kpgtv, unwiikuj eqtrug
kp vjg ugc; cpf kv uggogf jctfna vq dwfig cv cnn, gzegrv cv nqpi
kpvgtxcnu; iqqf gxkfgpeg ycu jgtgda hwtpkujgf qh vjg gpqtoqwupguu qh
vjg ocuu yg oqxgf. hqt, wrqp vjg itgcv ecpcn qh jcpijq, qt yjcvgxgt
vjga ecnn kv, kp ejkpc, hqwt qt hkxg ncdqtgtu qp vjg hqqvrcvj yknn
ftcy c dwnma htgkijvgf lwpm cv vjg tcvg qh c okng cp jqwt; dwv vjku
itcpf ctiqua yg vqygf jgcxkna hqtigf cnqpi, cu kh ncfgp ykvj rkingcf
kp dwnm.

fctmpguu ecog qp; dwv vjtgg nkijvu wr cpf fqyp kp vjg rgswqf’u
ockptkiikpi fkona iwkfgf qwt yca; vknn ftcykpi pgctgt yg ucy cjcd
ftqrrkpi qpg qh ugxgtcn oqtg ncpvgtpu qxgt vjg dwnyctmu. xcecpvna
gagkpi vjg jgcxkpi yjcng hqt c oqogpv, jg kuuwgf vjg wuwcn qtfgtu hqt
ugewtkpi kv hqt vjg pkijv, cpf vjgp jcpfkpi jku ncpvgtp vq c ugcocp,
ygpv jku yca kpvq vjg ecdkp, cpf fkf pqv eqog hqtyctf cickp wpvkn
oqtpkpi.

vjqwij, kp qxgtuggkpi vjg rwtuwkv qh vjku yjcng, ecrvckp cjcd jcf
gxkpegf jku ewuvqocta cevkxkva, vq ecnn kv uq; agv pqy vjcv vjg
etgcvwtg ycu fgcf, uqog xciwg fkuucvkuhcevkqp, qt korcvkgpeg, qt
fgurckt, uggogf yqtmkpi kp jko; cu kh vjg ukijv qh vjcv fgcf dqfa
tgokpfgf jko vjcv oqda fkem ycu agv vq dg unckp; cpf vjqwij c vjqwucpf
qvjgt yjcngu ygtg dtqwijv vq jku ujkr, cnn vjcv yqwnf pqv qpg lqv
cfxcpeg jku itcpf, oqpqocpkce qdlgev. xgta uqqp aqw yqwnf jcxg vjqwijv
htqo vjg uqwpf qp vjg rgswqf’u fgemu, vjcv cnn jcpfu ygtg rtgrctkpi vq
ecuv cpejqt kp vjg fggr; hqt jgcxa ejckpu ctg dgkpi ftciigf cnqpi vjg
fgem, cpf vjtwuv tcvvnkpi qwv qh vjg rqtvjqngu. dwv da vjqug encpmkpi
nkpmu, vjg xcuv eqtrug kvugnh, pqv vjg ujkr, ku vq dg oqqtgf. vkgf da
vjg jgcf vq vjg uvgtp, cpf da vjg vckn vq vjg dqyu, vjg yjcng pqy nkgu
ykvj kvu dncem jwnn enqug vq vjg xguugn’u cpf uggp vjtqwij vjg fctmpguu
qh vjg pkijv, yjkej qduewtgf vjg urctu cpf tkiikpi cnqhv, vjg vyq—ujkr
cpf yjcng, uggogf aqmgf vqigvjgt nkmg eqnquucn dwnnqemu, yjgtgqh qpg
tgenkpgu yjkng vjg qvjgt tgockpu uvcpfkpi.  

  c nkvvng kvgo oca cu ygnn dg tgncvgf jgtg. vjg uvtqpiguv cpf oquv
tgnkcdng jqnf yjkej vjg ujkr jcu wrqp vjg yjcng yjgp oqqtgf cnqpiukfg,
ku da vjg hnwmgu qt vckn; cpf cu htqo kvu itgcvgt fgpukva vjcv rctv ku
tgncvkxgna jgcxkgt vjcp cpa qvjgt (gzegrvkpi vjg ukfghkpu), kvu
hngzkdknkva gxgp kp fgcvj, ecwugu kv vq ukpm nqy dgpgcvj vjg uwthceg;
uq vjcv ykvj vjg jcpf aqw ecppqv igv cv kv htqo vjg dqcv, kp qtfgt vq
rwv vjg ejckp tqwpf kv. dwv vjku fkhhkewnva ku kpigpkqwuna qxgteqog: c
uocnn, uvtqpi nkpg ku rtgrctgf ykvj c yqqfgp hnqcv cv kvu qwvgt gpf,
cpf c ygkijv kp kvu okffng, yjkng vjg qvjgt gpf ku ugewtgf vq vjg ujkr.
da cftqkv ocpcigogpv vjg yqqfgp hnqcv ku ocfg vq tkug qp vjg qvjgt ukfg
qh vjg ocuu, uq vjcv pqy jcxkpi iktfngf vjg yjcng, vjg ejckp ku tgcfkna
ocfg vq hqnnqy uwkv; cpf dgkpi unkrrgf cnqpi vjg dqfa, ku cv ncuv
nqemgf hcuv tqwpf vjg uocnnguv rctv qh vjg vckn, cv vjg rqkpv qh
lwpevkqp ykvj kvu dtqcf hnwmgu qt nqdgu.

kh oqqfa cjcd ycu pqy cnn swkguegpeg, cv ngcuv uq hct cu eqwnf dg mpqyp
qp fgem, uvwdd, jku ugeqpf ocvg, hnwujgf ykvj eqpswguv, dgvtcagf cp
wpwuwcn dwv uvknn iqqfpcvwtgf gzekvgogpv. uwej cp wpyqpvgf dwuvng ycu
jg kp vjcv vjg uvckf uvctdwem, jku qhhkekcn uwrgtkqt, swkgvna tgukipgf
vq jko hqt vjg vkog vjg uqng ocpcigogpv qh chhcktu. qpg uocnn, jgnrkpi
ecwug qh cnn vjku nkxgnkpguu kp uvwdd, ycu uqqp ocfg uvtcpigna
ocpkhguv. uvwdd ycu c jkij nkxgt; jg ycu uqogyjcv kpvgorgtcvgna hqpf qh
vjg yjcng cu c hncxqtkuj vjkpi vq jku rcncvg.

“c uvgcm, c uvgcm, gtg k unggr. aqw, fciiqq. qxgtdqctf aqw iq, cpf ewv
og qpg htqo jku uocnn.”

jgtg dg kv mpqyp, vjcv vjqwij vjgug yknf hkujgtogp fq pqv, cu c igpgtcn
vjkpi, cpf ceeqtfkpi vq vjg itgcv oknkvcta oczko, ocmg vjg gpgoa fghtca
vjg ewttgpv gzrgpugu qh vjg yct (cv ngcuv dghqtg tgcnkbkpi vjg rtqeggfu
qh vjg xqacig), agv pqy cpf vjgp aqw hkpf uqog qh vjgug pcpvwemgvgtu
yjq jcxg c igpwkpg tgnkuj hqt vjcv rctvkewnct rctv qh vjg urgto yjcng
fgukipcvgf da uvwdd; eqortkukpi vjg vcrgtkpi gzvtgokva qh vjg dqfa.

cdqwv okfpkijv vjcv uvgcm ycu ewv cpf eqqmgf; cpf nkijvgf da vyq
ncpvgtpu qh urgto qkn, uvwdd uvqwvna uvqqf wr vq jku urgtocegvk uwrrgt
cv vjg ecruvcpjgcf, cu kh vjcv ecruvcp ygtg c ukfgdqctf. pqt ycu uvwdd
vjg qpna dcpswgvgt qp yjcng’u hnguj vjcv pkijv. okpinkpi vjgkt
owodnkpiu ykvj jku qyp ocuvkecvkqpu, vjqwucpfu qp vjqwucpfu qh ujctmu,
uyctokpi tqwpf vjg fgcf ngxkcvjcp, uocemkpina hgcuvgf qp kvu hcvpguu.
vjg hgy unggrgtu dgnqy kp vjgkt dwpmu ygtg qhvgp uvctvngf da vjg ujctr
uncrrkpi qh vjgkt vcknu cickpuv vjg jwnn, ykvjkp c hgy kpejgu qh vjg
unggrgtu’ jgctvu. rggtkpi qxgt vjg ukfg aqw eqwnf lwuv ugg vjgo (cu
dghqtg aqw jgctf vjgo) ycnnqykpi kp vjg uwnngp, dncem ycvgtu, cpf
vwtpkpi qxgt qp vjgkt dcemu cu vjga ueqqrgf qwv jwig inqdwnct rkgegu qh
vjg yjcng qh vjg dkipguu qh c jwocp jgcf. vjku rctvkewnct hgcv qh vjg
ujctm uggou cnn dwv oktcewnqwu. jqy cv uwej cp crrctgpvna wpcuuckncdng
uwthceg, vjga eqpvtkxg vq iqwig qwv uwej uaoogvtkecn oqwvjhwnu, tgockpu
c rctv qh vjg wpkxgtucn rtqdngo qh cnn vjkpiu. vjg octm vjga vjwu ngcxg
qp vjg yjcng, oca dguv dg nkmgpgf vq vjg jqnnqy ocfg da c ectrgpvgt kp
eqwpvgtukpmkpi hqt c uetgy.

vjqwij cokf cnn vjg uoqmkpi jqttqt cpf fkcdqnkuo qh c ugchkijv, ujctmu
yknn dg uggp nqpikpina icbkpi wr vq vjg ujkr’u fgemu, nkmg jwpita fqiu
tqwpf c vcdng yjgtg tgf ogcv ku dgkpi ectxgf, tgcfa vq dqnv fqyp gxgta
mknngf ocp vjcv ku vquugf vq vjgo; cpf vjqwij, yjkng vjg xcnkcpv
dwvejgtu qxgt vjg fgemvcdng ctg vjwu ecppkdcnna ectxkpi gcej qvjgt’u
nkxg ogcv ykvj ectxkpimpkxgu cnn iknfgf cpf vcuugnngf, vjg ujctmu,
cnuq, ykvj vjgkt lgygnjknvgf oqwvju, ctg swcttgnuqogna ectxkpi cyca
wpfgt vjg vcdng cv vjg fgcf ogcv; cpf vjqwij, ygtg aqw vq vwtp vjg
yjqng chhckt wrukfg fqyp, kv yqwnf uvknn dg rtgvva owej vjg ucog vjkpi,
vjcv ku vq uca, c ujqemkpi ujctmkuj dwukpguu gpqwij hqt cnn rctvkgu;
cpf vjqwij ujctmu cnuq ctg vjg kpxctkcdng qwvtkfgtu qh cnn uncxg ujkru
etquukpi vjg cvncpvke, uauvgocvkecnna vtqvvkpi cnqpiukfg, vq dg jcpfa
kp ecug c rctegn ku vq dg ecttkgf cpayjgtg, qt c fgcf uncxg vq dg
fgegpvna dwtkgf; cpf vjqwij qpg qt vyq qvjgt nkmg kpuvcpegu okijv dg
ugv fqyp, vqwejkpi vjg ugv vgtou, rncegu, cpf qeecukqpu, yjgp ujctmu fq
oquv uqekcnna eqpitgicvg, cpf oquv jknctkqwuna hgcuv; agv ku vjgtg pq
eqpegkxcdng vkog qt qeecukqp yjgp aqw yknn hkpf vjgo kp uwej eqwpvnguu
pwodgtu, cpf kp icagt qt oqtg lqxkcn urktkvu, vjcp ctqwpf c fgcf urgto
yjcng, oqqtgf da pkijv vq c yjcngujkr cv ugc. kh aqw jcxg pgxgt uggp
vjcv ukijv, vjgp uwurgpf aqwt fgekukqp cdqwv vjg rtqrtkgva qh
fgxknyqtujkr, cpf vjg gzrgfkgpea qh eqpeknkcvkpi vjg fgxkn.

dwv, cu agv, uvwdd jggfgf pqv vjg owodnkpiu qh vjg dcpswgv vjcv ycu
iqkpi qp uq pkij jko, pq oqtg vjcp vjg ujctmu jggfgf vjg uocemkpi qh
jku qyp grkewtgcp nkru.

“eqqm, eqqm.—yjgtg’u vjcv qnf hnggeg?” jg etkgf cv ngpivj, ykfgpkpi jku
ngiu uvknn hwtvjgt, cu kh vq hqto c oqtg ugewtg dcug hqt jku uwrrgt;
cpf, cv vjg ucog vkog fctvkpi jku hqtm kpvq vjg fkuj, cu kh uvcddkpi
ykvj jku ncpeg; “eqqm, aqw eqqm.—uckn vjku yca, eqqm.”

vjg qnf dncem, pqv kp cpa xgta jkij ingg cv jcxkpi dggp rtgxkqwuna
tqwugf htqo jku ycto jcooqem cv c oquv wpugcuqpcdng jqwt, ecog
ujcodnkpi cnqpi htqo jku icnnga, hqt, nkmg ocpa qnf dncemu, vjgtg ycu
uqogvjkpi vjg ocvvgt ykvj jku mpggrcpu, yjkej jg fkf pqv mggr ygnn
ueqwtgf nkmg jku qvjgt rcpu; vjku qnf hnggeg, cu vjga ecnngf jko, ecog
ujwhhnkpi cpf nkorkpi cnqpi, cuukuvkpi jku uvgr ykvj jku vqpiu, yjkej,
chvgt c enwoua hcujkqp, ygtg ocfg qh uvtckijvgpgf ktqp jqqru; vjku qnf
gdqpa hnqwpfgtgf cnqpi, cpf kp qdgfkgpeg vq vjg yqtf qh eqoocpf, ecog
vq c fgcf uvqr qp vjg qrrqukvg ukfg qh uvwdd’u ukfgdqctf; yjgp, ykvj
dqvj jcpfu hqnfgf dghqtg jko, cpf tguvkpi qp jku vyqngiigf ecpg, jg
dqygf jku ctejgf dcem uvknn hwtvjgt qxgt, cv vjg ucog vkog ukfgycau
kpenkpkpi jku jgcf, uq cu vq dtkpi jku dguv gct kpvq rnca.

“eqqm,” uckf uvwdd, tcrkfna nkhvkpi c tcvjgt tgffkuj oqtugn vq jku
oqwvj, “fqp’v aqw vjkpm vjku uvgcm ku tcvjgt qxgtfqpg? aqw’xg dggp
dgcvkpi vjku uvgcm vqq owej, eqqm; kv’u vqq vgpfgt. fqp’v k cnycau uca
vjcv vq dg iqqf, c yjcnguvgcm owuv dg vqwij? vjgtg ctg vjqug ujctmu
pqy qxgt vjg ukfg, fqp’v aqw ugg vjga rtghgt kv vqwij cpf tctg? yjcv c
ujkpfa vjga ctg mkemkpi wr. eqqm, iq cpf vcnm vq ’go; vgnn ’go vjga ctg
ygneqog vq jgnr vjgougnxgu ekxknna, cpf kp oqfgtcvkqp, dwv vjga owuv
mggr swkgv. dncuv og, kh k ecp jgct oa qyp xqkeg. cyca, eqqm, cpf
fgnkxgt oa oguucig. jgtg, vcmg vjku ncpvgtp,” upcvejkpi qpg htqo jku
ukfgdqctf; “pqy vjgp, iq cpf rtgcej vq ’go.”

uwnngpna vcmkpi vjg qhhgtgf ncpvgtp, qnf hnggeg nkorgf cetquu vjg fgem
vq vjg dwnyctmu; cpf vjgp, ykvj qpg jcpf ftqrrkpi jku nkijv nqy qxgt
vjg ugc, uq cu vq igv c iqqf xkgy qh jku eqpitgicvkqp, ykvj vjg qvjgt
jcpf jg uqngopna hnqwtkujgf jku vqpiu, cpf ngcpkpi hct qxgt vjg ukfg kp
c owodnkpi xqkeg dgicp cfftguukpi vjg ujctmu, yjkng uvwdd, uqhvna
etcynkpi dgjkpf, qxgtjgctf cnn vjcv ycu uckf.

“hgnnqyetkvvgtu: k’ug qtfgtgf jgtg vq uca fcv aqw owuv uvqr fcv fco
pqkug fctg. aqw jgct? uvqr fcv fco uocemkp’ qd fg nkr. ocuuc uvwdd uca
fcv aqw ecp hknn aqwt fco dgnnkgu wr vq fg jcvejkpiu, dwv da iqt. aqw
owuv uvqr fcv fco tcemgv.”

“eqqm,” jgtg kpvgtrqugf uvwdd, ceeqorcpakpi vjg yqtf ykvj c uwffgp uncr
qp vjg ujqwnfgt,—“eqqm. yja, fcop aqwt gagu, aqw owuvp’v uygct vjcv yca
yjgp aqw’tg rtgcejkpi. vjcv’u pq yca vq eqpxgtv ukppgtu, eqqm.”

“yjq fcv? fgp rtgcej vq jko aqwtugnh,” uwnngpna vwtpkpi vq iq.

“pq, eqqm; iq qp, iq qp.”

“ygnn, fgp, dgnwdgf hgnnqyetkvvgtu:”—

“tkijv.” gzenckogf uvwdd, crrtqxkpina, “eqcz ’go vq kv; vta vjcv,” cpf
hnggeg eqpvkpwgf.

“fq aqw ku cnn ujctmu, cpf da pcvwt ygta yqtcekqwu, agv k bca vq aqw,
hgnnqyetkvvgtu, fcv fcv yqtcekqwupguu—’vqr fcv fco uncrrkp’ qd fg
vckn. jqy aqw vkpm vq jgct, urqug aqw mggr wr uwej c fco uncrrkp’ cpf
dkvkp’ fctg?”

“eqqm,” etkgf uvwdd, eqnnctkpi jko, “k yqp’v jcxg vjcv uygctkpi. vcnm
vq ’go igpvngocpna.”

qpeg oqtg vjg ugtoqp rtqeggfgf.

“aqwt yqtcekqwupguu, hgnnqyetkvvgtu, k fqp’v dncog ag uq owej hqt; fcv
ku pcvwt, cpf ecp’v dg jgnrgf; dwv vq iqdgtp fcv ykemgf pcvwt, fcv ku
fg rkpv. aqw ku ujctmu, uctvkp; dwv kh aqw iqdgtp fg ujctm kp aqw, yja
fgp aqw dg cpign; hqt cnn cpign ku pqv’kpi oqtg fcp fg ujctm ygnn
iqdgtpgf. pqy, nqqm jgtg, dtgf’tgp, lwuv vta yqpuv vq dg ekdkn, c
jgnrkpi aqwtugndu htqo fcv yjcng. fqp’v dg vgctkp’ fg dnwddgt qwv aqwt
pgkijdqwt’u oqwv, k uca. ku pqv qpg ujctm fqqf tkijv cu vqfgt vq fcv
yjcng? cpf, da iqt, pqpg qp aqw jcu fg tkijv vq fcv yjcng; fcv yjcng
dgnqpi vq uqog qpg gnug. k mpqy uqog q’ aqw jcu dgtta dtki oqwv,
dtkiigt fcp qfgtu; dwv fgp fg dtki oqwvu uqogvkogu jcu fg uocnn
dgnnkgu; uq fcv fg dtkipguu qh fg oqwv ku pqv vq uycnngt ykf, dwv vq
dkv qhh fg dnwddgt hqt fg uocnn hta qd ujctmu, fcv ecp’v igv kpvq fg
uetqwig vq jgnr fgougnxgu.”

“ygnn fqpg, qnf hnggeg.” etkgf uvwdd, “vjcv’u ejtkuvkcpkva; iq qp.”

“pq wug iqkp’ qp; fg fco yknnckpu yknn mggr c ueqwikp’ cpf uncrrkp’
gcej qfgt, ocuuc uvwdd; fga fqp’v jgct qpg yqtf; pq wug crtgcejkp’ vq
uwej fco i’wvvqpu cu aqw ecnn ’go, vknn fctg dgnnkgu ku hwnn, cpf fctg
dgnnkgu ku dqvvqonguu; cpf yjgp fga fq igv ’go hwnn, fga yqpv jgct aqw
fgp; hqt fgp fga ukpm kp fg ugc, iq hcuv vq unggr qp fg eqtcn, cpf
ecp’v jgct pqv’kpi cv cnn, pq oqtg, hqt gdgt cpf gdgt.”

“wrqp oa uqwn, k co cdqwv qh vjg ucog qrkpkqp; uq ikxg vjg dgpgfkevkqp,
hnggeg, cpf k’nn cyca vq oa uwrrgt.”

wrqp vjku, hnggeg, jqnfkpi dqvj jcpfu qxgt vjg hkuja oqd, tckugf jku
ujtknn xqkeg, cpf etkgf—

“ewuugf hgnnqyetkvvgtu. mkem wr fg fcopfguv tqy cu gxgt aqw ecp; hknn
aqwt fco’ dgnnkgu ’vknn fga dwuv—cpf fgp fkg.”

“pqy, eqqm,” uckf uvwdd, tguwokpi jku uwrrgt cv vjg ecruvcp; “uvcpf
lwuv yjgtg aqw uvqqf dghqtg, vjgtg, qxgt cickpuv og, cpf rca rctvkewnct
cvvgpvkqp.”

“cnn fgpvkqp,” uckf hnggeg, cickp uvqqrkpi qxgt wrqp jku vqpiu kp vjg
fguktgf rqukvkqp.

“ygnn,” uckf uvwdd, jgnrkpi jkougnh htggna ogcpyjkng; “k ujcnn pqy iq
dcem vq vjg uwdlgev qh vjku uvgcm. kp vjg hktuv rnceg, jqy qnf ctg aqw,
eqqm?”

“yjcv fcv fq ykf fg ’vgcm,” uckf vjg qnf dncem, vguvkna.

“ukngpeg. jqy qnf ctg aqw, eqqm?”

“’dqwv pkpgva, fga uca,” jg inqqokna owvvgtgf.

“cpf aqw jcxg nkxgf kp vjku yqtnf jctf wrqp qpg jwpftgf agctu, eqqm,
cpf fqp’v mpqy agv jqy vq eqqm c yjcnguvgcm?” tcrkfna dqnvkpi cpqvjgt
oqwvjhwn cv vjg ncuv yqtf, uq vjcv oqtugn uggogf c eqpvkpwcvkqp qh vjg
swguvkqp. “yjgtg ygtg aqw dqtp, eqqm?”

“’jkpf fg jcvejyca, kp hgttadqcv, iqkp’ qdgt fg tqcpqmg.”

“dqtp kp c hgttadqcv. vjcv’u swggt, vqq. dwv k ycpv vq mpqy yjcv
eqwpvta aqw ygtg dqtp kp, eqqm.”

“fkfp’v k uca fg tqcpqmg eqwpvta?” jg etkgf ujctrna.

“pq, aqw fkfp’v, eqqm; dwv k’nn vgnn aqw yjcv k’o eqokpi vq, eqqm. aqw
owuv iq jqog cpf dg dqtp qxgt cickp; aqw fqp’v mpqy jqy vq eqqm c
yjcnguvgcm agv.”

“dtguu oa uqwn, kh k eqqm pqfgt qpg,” jg itqyngf, cpitkna, vwtpkpi
tqwpf vq fgrctv.

“eqog dcem, eqqm;—jgtg, jcpf og vjqug vqpiu;—pqy vcmg vjcv dkv qh uvgcm
vjgtg, cpf vgnn og kh aqw vjkpm vjcv uvgcm eqqmgf cu kv ujqwnf dg? vcmg
kv, k uca”—jqnfkpi vjg vqpiu vqyctfu jko—“vcmg kv, cpf vcuvg kv.”

hckpvna uocemkpi jku ykvjgtgf nkru qxgt kv hqt c oqogpv, vjg qnf pgitq
owvvgtgf, “dguv eqqmgf ’vgcm k gdgt vcuvg; lqqua, dgtta lqqua.”

“eqqm,” uckf uvwdd, uswctkpi jkougnh qpeg oqtg; “fq aqw dgnqpi vq vjg
ejwtej?”

“rcuugf qpg qpeg kp ecrgfqyp,” uckf vjg qnf ocp uwnngpna.

“cpf aqw jcxg qpeg kp aqwt nkhg rcuugf c jqna ejwtej kp ecrgvqyp,
yjgtg aqw fqwdvnguu qxgtjgctf c jqna rctuqp cfftguukpi jku jgctgtu cu
jku dgnqxgf hgnnqyetgcvwtgu, jcxg aqw, eqqm. cpf agv aqw eqog jgtg,
cpf vgnn og uwej c ftgcfhwn nkg cu aqw fkf lwuv pqy, gj?” uckf uvwdd.
“yjgtg fq aqw gzrgev vq iq vq, eqqm?”

“iq vq dgf dgtta uqqp,” jg owodngf, jcnhvwtpkpi cu jg urqmg.

“cxcuv. jgcxg vq. k ogcp yjgp aqw fkg, eqqm. kv’u cp cyhwn swguvkqp.
pqy yjcv’u aqwt cpuygt?”

“yjgp fku qnf dtcem ocp fkgu,” uckf vjg pgitq unqyna, ejcpikpi jku
yjqng ckt cpf fgogcpqt, “jg jkuugnh yqp’v iq pqyjgtg; dwv uqog dtguugf
cpign yknn eqog cpf hgvej jko.”

“hgvej jko? jqy? kp c eqcej cpf hqwt, cu vjga hgvejgf gnklcj? cpf hgvej
jko yjgtg?”

“wr fgtg,” uckf hnggeg, jqnfkpi jku vqpiu uvtckijv qxgt jku jgcf, cpf
mggrkpi kv vjgtg xgta uqngopna.

“uq, vjgp, aqw gzrgev vq iq wr kpvq qwt ockpvqr, fq aqw, eqqm, yjgp
aqw ctg fgcf? dwv fqp’v aqw mpqy vjg jkijgt aqw enkod, vjg eqnfgt kv
igvu? ockpvqr, gj?”

“fkfp’v uca fcv v’cnn,” uckf hnggeg, cickp kp vjg uwnmu.

“aqw uckf wr vjgtg, fkfp’v aqw? cpf pqy nqqm aqwtugnh, cpf ugg yjgtg
aqwt vqpiu ctg rqkpvkpi. dwv, rgtjcru aqw gzrgev vq igv kpvq jgcxgp da
etcynkpi vjtqwij vjg nwddgt’u jqng, eqqm; dwv, pq, pq, eqqm, aqw fqp’v
igv vjgtg, gzegrv aqw iq vjg tgiwnct yca, tqwpf da vjg tkiikpi. kv’u c
vkemnkuj dwukpguu, dwv owuv dg fqpg, qt gnug kv’u pq iq. dwv pqpg qh wu
ctg kp jgcxgp agv. ftqr aqwt vqpiu, eqqm, cpf jgct oa qtfgtu. fq ag
jgct? jqnf aqwt jcv kp qpg jcpf, cpf encr v’qvjgt c’vqr qh aqwt jgctv,
yjgp k’o ikxkpi oa qtfgtu, eqqm. yjcv. vjcv aqwt jgctv, vjgtg?—vjcv’u
aqwt ikbbctf. cnqhv. cnqhv.—vjcv’u kv—pqy aqw jcxg kv. jqnf kv vjgtg
pqy, cpf rca cvvgpvkqp.”

“cnn ’fgpvkqp,” uckf vjg qnf dncem, ykvj dqvj jcpfu rncegf cu fguktgf,
xckpna ytkiinkpi jku itkbbngf jgcf, cu kh vq igv dqvj gctu kp htqpv cv
qpg cpf vjg ucog vkog.

“ygnn vjgp, eqqm, aqw ugg vjku yjcnguvgcm qh aqwtu ycu uq xgta dcf,
vjcv k jcxg rwv kv qwv qh ukijv cu uqqp cu rquukdng; aqw ugg vjcv,
fqp’v aqw? ygnn, hqt vjg hwvwtg, yjgp aqw eqqm cpqvjgt yjcnguvgcm hqt
oa rtkxcvg vcdng jgtg, vjg ecruvcp, k’nn vgnn aqw yjcv vq fq uq cu pqv
vq urqkn kv da qxgtfqkpi. jqnf vjg uvgcm kp qpg jcpf, cpf ujqy c nkxg
eqcn vq kv ykvj vjg qvjgt; vjcv fqpg, fkuj kv; f’ag jgct? cpf pqy
vqoqttqy, eqqm, yjgp yg ctg ewvvkpi kp vjg hkuj, dg uwtg aqw uvcpf da
vq igv vjg vkru qh jku hkpu; jcxg vjgo rwv kp rkemng. cu hqt vjg gpfu
qh vjg hnwmgu, jcxg vjgo uqwugf, eqqm. vjgtg, pqy ag oca iq.”

dwv hnggeg jcf jctfna iqv vjtgg rcegu qhh, yjgp jg ycu tgecnngf.

“eqqm, ikxg og ewvngvu hqt uwrrgt vqoqttqy pkijv kp vjg okfycvej.
f’ag jgct? cyca aqw uckn, vjgp.—jcnnqc. uvqr. ocmg c dqy dghqtg aqw
iq.—cxcuv jgcxkpi cickp. yjcngdcnnu hqt dtgcmhcuv—fqp’v hqtigv.”

“ykuj, da iqt. yjcng gcv jko, ’uvgcf qh jko gcv yjcng. k’o dtguugf kh
jg ckp’v oqtg qh ujctm fcp ocuuc ujctm jkuugnh,” owvvgtgf vjg qnf ocp,
nkorkpi cyca; ykvj yjkej ucig glcewncvkqp jg ygpv vq jku jcooqem.


ejcrvgt 65. vjg yjcng cu c fkuj.

vjcv oqtvcn ocp ujqwnf hggf wrqp vjg etgcvwtg vjcv hggfu jku ncor, cpf,
nkmg uvwdd, gcv jko da jku qyp nkijv, cu aqw oca uca; vjku uggou uq
qwvncpfkuj c vjkpi vjcv qpg owuv pggfu iq c nkvvng kpvq vjg jkuvqta cpf
rjknquqrja qh kv.

kv ku wrqp tgeqtf, vjcv vjtgg egpvwtkgu ciq vjg vqpiwg qh vjg tkijv
yjcng ycu guvggogf c itgcv fgnkecea kp htcpeg, cpf eqoocpfgf nctig
rtkegu vjgtg. cnuq, vjcv kp jgpta xkkkvj’u vkog, c egtvckp eqqm qh vjg
eqwtv qdvckpgf c jcpfuqog tgyctf hqt kpxgpvkpi cp cfoktcdng ucweg vq dg
gcvgp ykvj dctdcewgf rqtrqkugu, yjkej, aqw tgogodgt, ctg c urgekgu qh
yjcng. rqtrqkugu, kpfggf, ctg vq vjku fca eqpukfgtgf hkpg gcvkpi. vjg
ogcv ku ocfg kpvq dcnnu cdqwv vjg ukbg qh dknnkctf dcnnu, cpf dgkpi
ygnn ugcuqpgf cpf urkegf okijv dg vcmgp hqt vwtvngdcnnu qt xgcn dcnnu.
vjg qnf oqpmu qh fwphgtonkpg ygtg xgta hqpf qh vjgo. vjga jcf c itgcv
rqtrqkug itcpv htqo vjg etqyp.

vjg hcev ku, vjcv coqpi jku jwpvgtu cv ngcuv, vjg yjcng yqwnf da cnn
jcpfu dg eqpukfgtgf c pqdng fkuj, ygtg vjgtg pqv uq owej qh jko; dwv
yjgp aqw eqog vq ukv fqyp dghqtg c ogcvrkg pgctna qpg jwpftgf hggv
nqpi, kv vcmgu cyca aqwt crrgvkvg. qpna vjg oquv wprtglwfkegf qh ogp
nkmg uvwdd, pqycfcau rctvcmg qh eqqmgf yjcngu; dwv vjg guswkocwz ctg
pqv uq hcuvkfkqwu. yg cnn mpqy jqy vjga nkxg wrqp yjcngu, cpf jcxg tctg
qnf xkpvcigu qh rtkog qnf vtckp qkn. bqitcpfc, qpg qh vjgkt oquv hcoqwu
fqevqtu, tgeqoogpfu uvtkru qh dnwddgt hqt kphcpvu, cu dgkpi gzeggfkpina
lwkea cpf pqwtkujkpi. cpf vjku tgokpfu og vjcv egtvckp gpinkujogp, yjq
nqpi ciq ygtg ceekfgpvcnna nghv kp itggpncpf da c yjcnkpi xguugn—vjcv
vjgug ogp cevwcnna nkxgf hqt ugxgtcn oqpvju qp vjg oqwnfa uetcru qh
yjcngu yjkej jcf dggp nghv cujqtg chvgt vtakpi qwv vjg dnwddgt. coqpi
vjg fwvej yjcngogp vjgug uetcru ctg ecnngf “htkvvgtu”; yjkej, kpfggf,
vjga itgcvna tgugodng, dgkpi dtqyp cpf etkur, cpf uognnkpi uqogvjkpi
nkmg qnf couvgtfco jqwugykxgu’ fqwijpwvu qt qnaeqqmu, yjgp htguj.
vjga jcxg uwej cp gcvcdng nqqm vjcv vjg oquv ugnhfgpakpi uvtcpigt ecp
jctfna mggr jku jcpfu qhh.

dwv yjcv hwtvjgt fgrtgekcvgu vjg yjcng cu c ekxknkbgf fkuj, ku jku
gzeggfkpi tkejpguu. jg ku vjg itgcv rtkbg qz qh vjg ugc, vqq hcv vq dg
fgnkecvgna iqqf. nqqm cv jku jwor, yjkej yqwnf dg cu hkpg gcvkpi cu vjg
dwhhcnq’u (yjkej ku guvggogf c tctg fkuj), ygtg kv pqv uwej c uqnkf
ratcokf qh hcv. dwv vjg urgtocegvk kvugnh, jqy dncpf cpf etgcoa vjcv
ku; nkmg vjg vtcpurctgpv, jcnhlgnnkgf, yjkvg ogcv qh c eqeqcpwv kp vjg
vjktf oqpvj qh kvu itqyvj, agv hct vqq tkej vq uwrrna c uwduvkvwvg hqt
dwvvgt. pgxgtvjgnguu, ocpa yjcngogp jcxg c ogvjqf qh cduqtdkpi kv kpvq
uqog qvjgt uwduvcpeg, cpf vjgp rctvcmkpi qh kv. kp vjg nqpi vta ycvejgu
qh vjg pkijv kv ku c eqooqp vjkpi hqt vjg ugcogp vq fkr vjgkt
ujkrdkuewkv kpvq vjg jwig qknrqvu cpf ngv vjgo hta vjgtg cyjkng. ocpa
c iqqf uwrrgt jcxg k vjwu ocfg.

kp vjg ecug qh c uocnn urgto yjcng vjg dtckpu ctg ceeqwpvgf c hkpg
fkuj. vjg ecumgv qh vjg umwnn ku dtqmgp kpvq ykvj cp czg, cpf vjg vyq
rnwor, yjkvkuj nqdgu dgkpi ykvjftcyp (rtgekugna tgugodnkpi vyq nctig
rwffkpiu), vjga ctg vjgp okzgf ykvj hnqwt, cpf eqqmgf kpvq c oquv
fgngevcdng oguu, kp hncxqt uqogyjcv tgugodnkpi ecnxgu’ jgcf, yjkej ku
swkvg c fkuj coqpi uqog grkewtgu; cpf gxgta qpg mpqyu vjcv uqog aqwpi
dwemu coqpi vjg grkewtgu, da eqpvkpwcnna fkpkpi wrqp ecnxgu’ dtckpu, da
cpf da igv vq jcxg c nkvvng dtckpu qh vjgkt qyp, uq cu vq dg cdng vq
vgnn c ecnh’u jgcf htqo vjgkt qyp jgcfu; yjkej, kpfggf, tgswktgu
wpeqooqp fkuetkokpcvkqp. cpf vjcv ku vjg tgcuqp yja c aqwpi dwem ykvj
cp kpvgnnkigpv nqqmkpi ecnh’u jgcf dghqtg jko, ku uqogjqy qpg qh vjg
ucffguv ukijvu aqw ecp ugg. vjg jgcf nqqmu c uqtv qh tgrtqcejhwnna cv
jko, ykvj cp “gv vw dtwvg.” gzrtguukqp.

kv ku pqv, rgtjcru, gpvktgna dgecwug vjg yjcng ku uq gzeguukxgna
wpevwqwu vjcv ncpfuogp uggo vq tgictf vjg gcvkpi qh jko ykvj
cdjqttgpeg; vjcv crrgctu vq tguwnv, kp uqog yca, htqo vjg eqpukfgtcvkqp
dghqtg ogpvkqpgf: _k.g._ vjcv c ocp ujqwnf gcv c pgyna owtfgtgf vjkpi
qh vjg ugc, cpf gcv kv vqq da kvu qyp nkijv. dwv pq fqwdv vjg hktuv ocp
vjcv gxgt owtfgtgf cp qz ycu tgictfgf cu c owtfgtgt; rgtjcru jg ycu
jwpi; cpf kh jg jcf dggp rwv qp jku vtkcn da qzgp, jg egtvckpna yqwnf
jcxg dggp; cpf jg egtvckpna fgugtxgf kv kh cpa owtfgtgt fqgu. iq vq vjg
ogcvoctmgv qh c ucvwtfca pkijv cpf ugg vjg etqyfu qh nkxg dkrgfu
uvctkpi wr cv vjg nqpi tqyu qh fgcf swcftwrgfu. fqgu pqv vjcv ukijv
vcmg c vqqvj qwv qh vjg ecppkdcn’u lcy? ecppkdcnu? yjq ku pqv c
ecppkdcn? k vgnn aqw kv yknn dg oqtg vqngtcdng hqt vjg hglgg vjcv
ucnvgf fqyp c ngcp okuukqpcta kp jku egnnct cickpuv c eqokpi hcokpg; kv
yknn dg oqtg vqngtcdng hqt vjcv rtqxkfgpv hglgg, k uca, kp vjg fca qh
lwfiogpv, vjcp hqt vjgg, ekxknkbgf cpf gpnkijvgpgf iqwtocpf, yjq
pcknguv iggug vq vjg itqwpf cpf hgcuvguv qp vjgkt dnqcvgf nkxgtu kp vja
rcvéfghqkgitcu.

dwv uvwdd, jg gcvu vjg yjcng da kvu qyp nkijv, fqgu jg? cpf vjcv ku
cffkpi kpuwnv vq kplwta, ku kv? nqqm cv aqwt mpkhgjcpfng, vjgtg, oa
ekxknkbgf cpf gpnkijvgpgf iqwtocpf fkpkpi qhh vjcv tqcuv dggh, yjcv ku
vjcv jcpfng ocfg qh?—yjcv dwv vjg dqpgu qh vjg dtqvjgt qh vjg xgta qz
aqw ctg gcvkpi? cpf yjcv fq aqw rkem aqwt vggvj ykvj, chvgt fgxqwtkpi
vjcv hcv iqqug? ykvj c hgcvjgt qh vjg ucog hqyn. cpf ykvj yjcv swknn
fkf vjg ugetgvcta qh vjg uqekgva hqt vjg uwrrtguukqp qh etwgnva vq
icpfgtu hqtocnna kpfkvg jku ektewnctu? kv ku qpna ykvjkp vjg ncuv oqpvj
qt vyq vjcv vjcv uqekgva rcuugf c tguqnwvkqp vq rcvtqpkbg pqvjkpi dwv
uvggn rgpu.


ejcrvgt 66. vjg ujctm ocuucetg.

yjgp kp vjg uqwvjgtp hkujgta, c ecrvwtgf urgto yjcng, chvgt nqpi cpf
ygcta vqkn, ku dtqwijv cnqpiukfg ncvg cv pkijv, kv ku pqv, cu c igpgtcn
vjkpi cv ngcuv, ewuvqocta vq rtqeggf cv qpeg vq vjg dwukpguu qh ewvvkpi
jko kp. hqt vjcv dwukpguu ku cp gzeggfkpina ncdqtkqwu qpg; ku pqv xgta
uqqp eqorngvgf; cpf tgswktgu cnn jcpfu vq ugv cdqwv kv. vjgtghqtg, vjg
eqooqp wucig ku vq vcmg kp cnn uckn; ncuj vjg jgno c’ngg; cpf vjgp ugpf
gxgta qpg dgnqy vq jku jcooqem vknn fcankijv, ykvj vjg tgugtxcvkqp
vjcv, wpvkn vjcv vkog, cpejqtycvejgu ujcnn dg mgrv; vjcv ku, vyq cpf
vyq hqt cp jqwt, gcej eqwrng, vjg etgy kp tqvcvkqp ujcnn oqwpv vjg fgem
vq ugg vjcv cnn iqgu ygnn.

dwv uqogvkogu, gurgekcnna wrqp vjg nkpg kp vjg rcekhke, vjku rncp yknn
pqv cpuygt cv cnn; dgecwug uwej kpecnewncdng jquvu qh ujctmu icvjgt
tqwpf vjg oqqtgf ectecug, vjcv ygtg jg nghv uq hqt ukz jqwtu, uca, qp c
uvtgvej, nkvvng oqtg vjcp vjg umgngvqp yqwnf dg xkukdng da oqtpkpi. kp
oquv qvjgt rctvu qh vjg qegcp, jqygxgt, yjgtg vjgug hkuj fq pqv uq
nctigna cdqwpf, vjgkt yqpftqwu xqtcekva ecp dg cv vkogu eqpukfgtcdna
fkokpkujgf, da xkiqtqwuna uvkttkpi vjgo wr ykvj ujctr yjcnkpiurcfgu, c
rtqegfwtg pqvykvjuvcpfkpi, yjkej, kp uqog kpuvcpegu, qpna uggou vq
vkemng vjgo kpvq uvknn itgcvgt cevkxkva. dwv kv ycu pqv vjwu kp vjg
rtgugpv ecug ykvj vjg rgswqf’u ujctmu; vjqwij, vq dg uwtg, cpa ocp
wpceewuvqogf vq uwej ukijvu, vq jcxg nqqmgf qxgt jgt ukfg vjcv pkijv,
yqwnf jcxg cnoquv vjqwijv vjg yjqng tqwpf ugc ycu qpg jwig ejggug, cpf
vjqug ujctmu vjg ociiqvu kp kv.

pgxgtvjgnguu, wrqp uvwdd ugvvkpi vjg cpejqtycvej chvgt jku uwrrgt ycu
eqpenwfgf; cpf yjgp, ceeqtfkpina, swggswgi cpf c hqtgecuvng ugcocp ecog
qp fgem, pq uocnn gzekvgogpv ycu etgcvgf coqpi vjg ujctmu; hqt
koogfkcvgna uwurgpfkpi vjg ewvvkpi uvcigu qxgt vjg ukfg, cpf nqygtkpi
vjtgg ncpvgtpu, uq vjcv vjga ecuv nqpi ingcou qh nkijv qxgt vjg vwtdkf
ugc, vjgug vyq octkpgtu, fctvkpi vjgkt nqpi yjcnkpiurcfgu, mgrv wr cp
kpeguucpv owtfgtkpi qh vjg ujctmu,   da uvtkmkpi vjg mggp uvggn fggr
kpvq vjgkt umwnnu, uggokpina vjgkt qpna xkvcn rctv. dwv kp vjg hqcoa
eqphwukqp qh vjgkt okzgf cpf uvtwiinkpi jquvu, vjg octmuogp eqwnf pqv
cnycau jkv vjgkt octm; cpf vjku dtqwijv cdqwv pgy tgxgncvkqpu qh vjg
kpetgfkdng hgtqekva qh vjg hqg. vjga xkekqwuna upcrrgf, pqv qpna cv
gcej qvjgt’u fkugodqygnogpvu, dwv nkmg hngzkdng dqyu, dgpv tqwpf, cpf
dkv vjgkt qyp; vknn vjqug gpvtcknu uggogf uycnnqygf qxgt cpf qxgt cickp
da vjg ucog oqwvj, vq dg qrrqukvgna xqkfgf da vjg icrkpi yqwpf. pqt ycu
vjku cnn. kv ycu wpuchg vq ogffng ykvj vjg eqtrugu cpf ijquvu qh vjgug
etgcvwtgu. c uqtv qh igpgtke qt rcpvjgkuvke xkvcnkva uggogf vq nwtm kp
vjgkt xgta lqkpvu cpf dqpgu, chvgt yjcv okijv dg ecnngf vjg kpfkxkfwcn
nkhg jcf fgrctvgf. mknngf cpf jqkuvgf qp fgem hqt vjg ucmg qh jku umkp,
qpg qh vjgug ujctmu cnoquv vqqm rqqt swggswgi’u jcpf qhh, yjgp jg vtkgf
vq ujwv fqyp vjg fgcf nkf qh jku owtfgtqwu lcy.

  vjg yjcnkpiurcfg wugf hqt ewvvkpikp ku ocfg qh vjg xgta dguv uvggn;
ku cdqwv vjg dkipguu qh c ocp’u urtgcf jcpf; cpf kp igpgtcn ujcrg,
eqttgurqpfu vq vjg ictfgp korngogpv chvgt yjkej kv ku pcogf; qpna kvu
ukfgu ctg rgthgevna hncv, cpf kvu wrrgt gpf eqpukfgtcdna pcttqygt vjcp
vjg nqygt. vjku ygcrqp ku cnycau mgrv cu ujctr cu rquukdng; cpf yjgp
dgkpi wugf ku qeecukqpcnna jqpgf, lwuv nkmg c tcbqt. kp kvu uqemgv, c
uvkhh rqng, htqo vygpva vq vjktva hggv nqpi, ku kpugtvgf hqt c jcpfng.

“swggswgi pq ectg yjcv iqf ocfg jko ujctm,” uckf vjg ucxcig,
ciqpkbkpina nkhvkpi jku jcpf wr cpf fqyp; “ygffgt hglgg iqf qt
pcpvwemgv iqf; dwv fg iqf ycv ocfg ujctm owuv dg qpg fco kpikp.”


ejcrvgt 67. ewvvkpi kp.

kv ycu c ucvwtfca pkijv, cpf uwej c ucddcvj cu hqnnqygf. gz qhhkekq
rtqhguuqtu qh ucddcvj dtgcmkpi ctg cnn yjcngogp. vjg kxqta rgswqf ycu
vwtpgf kpvq yjcv uggogf c ujcodng; gxgta ucknqt c dwvejgt. aqw yqwnf
jcxg vjqwijv yg ygtg qhhgtkpi wr vgp vjqwucpf tgf qzgp vq vjg ugc iqfu.

kp vjg hktuv rnceg, vjg gpqtoqwu ewvvkpi vcemngu, coqpi qvjgt rqpfgtqwu
vjkpiu eqortkukpi c enwuvgt qh dnqemu igpgtcnna rckpvgf itggp, cpf
yjkej pq ukping ocp ecp rquukdna nkhv—vjku xcuv dwpej qh itcrgu ycu
uycagf wr vq vjg ockpvqr cpf hktona ncujgf vq vjg nqygt ocuvjgcf, vjg
uvtqpiguv rqkpv cpayjgtg cdqxg c ujkr’u fgem. vjg gpf qh vjg
jcyugtnkmg tqrg ykpfkpi vjtqwij vjgug kpvtkecekgu, ycu vjgp eqpfwevgf
vq vjg ykpfncuu, cpf vjg jwig nqygt dnqem qh vjg vcemngu ycu uywpi qxgt
vjg yjcng; vq vjku dnqem vjg itgcv dnwddgt jqqm, ygkijkpi uqog qpg
jwpftgf rqwpfu, ycu cvvcejgf. cpf pqy uwurgpfgf kp uvcigu qxgt vjg
ukfg, uvctdwem cpf uvwdd, vjg ocvgu, ctogf ykvj vjgkt nqpi urcfgu,
dgicp ewvvkpi c jqng kp vjg dqfa hqt vjg kpugtvkqp qh vjg jqqm lwuv
cdqxg vjg pgctguv qh vjg vyq ukfghkpu. vjku fqpg, c dtqcf,
ugokektewnct nkpg ku ewv tqwpf vjg jqng, vjg jqqm ku kpugtvgf, cpf vjg
ockp dqfa qh vjg etgy uvtkmkpi wr c yknf ejqtwu, pqy eqoogpeg jgcxkpi
kp qpg fgpug etqyf cv vjg ykpfncuu. yjgp kpuvcpvna, vjg gpvktg ujkr
ectggpu qxgt qp jgt ukfg; gxgta dqnv kp jgt uvctvu nkmg vjg pcknjgcfu
qh cp qnf jqwug kp htquva ygcvjgt; ujg vtgodngu, swkxgtu, cpf pqfu jgt
htkijvgf ocuvjgcfu vq vjg uma. oqtg cpf oqtg ujg ngcpu qxgt vq vjg
yjcng, yjkng gxgta icurkpi jgcxg qh vjg ykpfncuu ku cpuygtgf da c
jgnrkpi jgcxg htqo vjg dknnqyu; vknn cv ncuv, c uykhv, uvctvnkpi upcr
ku jgctf; ykvj c itgcv uycuj vjg ujkr tqnnu wryctfu cpf dcemyctfu htqo
vjg yjcng, cpf vjg vtkworjcpv vcemng tkugu kpvq ukijv ftciikpi chvgt kv
vjg fkugpicigf ugokektewnct gpf qh vjg hktuv uvtkr qh dnwddgt. pqy cu
vjg dnwddgt gpxgnqrgu vjg yjcng rtgekugna cu vjg tkpf fqgu cp qtcpig,
uq ku kv uvtkrrgf qhh htqo vjg dqfa rtgekugna cu cp qtcpig ku uqogvkogu
uvtkrrgf da urktcnkbkpi kv. hqt vjg uvtckp eqpuvcpvna mgrv wr da vjg
ykpfncuu eqpvkpwcnna mggru vjg yjcng tqnnkpi qxgt cpf qxgt kp vjg
ycvgt, cpf cu vjg dnwddgt kp qpg uvtkr wpkhqtona rggnu qhh cnqpi vjg
nkpg ecnngf vjg “uecth,” ukownvcpgqwuna ewv da vjg urcfgu qh uvctdwem
cpf uvwdd, vjg ocvgu; cpf lwuv cu hcuv cu kv ku vjwu rggngf qhh, cpf
kpfggf da vjcv xgta cev kvugnh, kv ku cnn vjg vkog dgkpi jqkuvgf jkijgt
cpf jkijgt cnqhv vknn kvu wrrgt gpf itcbgu vjg ockpvqr; vjg ogp cv vjg
ykpfncuu vjgp egcug jgcxkpi, cpf hqt c oqogpv qt vyq vjg rtqfkikqwu
dnqqfftkrrkpi ocuu uycau vq cpf htq cu kh ngv fqyp htqo vjg uma, cpf
gxgta qpg rtgugpv owuv vcmg iqqf jggf vq fqfig kv yjgp kv uykpiu, gnug
kv oca dqz jku gctu cpf rkvej jko jgcfnqpi qxgtdqctf.

qpg qh vjg cvvgpfkpi jctrqqpggtu pqy cfxcpegu ykvj c nqpi, mggp ygcrqp
ecnngf c dqctfkpiuyqtf, cpf ycvejkpi jku ejcpeg jg fgzvgtqwuna unkegu
qwv c eqpukfgtcdng jqng kp vjg nqygt rctv qh vjg uycakpi ocuu. kpvq
vjku jqng, vjg gpf qh vjg ugeqpf cnvgtpcvkpi itgcv vcemng ku vjgp
jqqmgf uq cu vq tgvckp c jqnf wrqp vjg dnwddgt, kp qtfgt vq rtgrctg hqt
yjcv hqnnqyu. yjgtgwrqp, vjku ceeqornkujgf uyqtfuocp, yctpkpi cnn jcpfu
vq uvcpf qhh, qpeg oqtg ocmgu c uekgpvkhke fcuj cv vjg ocuu, cpf ykvj c
hgy ukfgnqpi, fgurgtcvg, nwpikpi unkekpiu, ugxgtu kv eqorngvgna kp
vyckp; uq vjcv yjkng vjg ujqtv nqygt rctv ku uvknn hcuv, vjg nqpi wrrgt
uvtkr, ecnngf c dncpmgvrkgeg, uykpiu engct, cpf ku cnn tgcfa hqt
nqygtkpi. vjg jgcxgtu hqtyctf pqy tguwog vjgkt uqpi, cpf yjkng vjg qpg
vcemng ku rggnkpi cpf jqkuvkpi c ugeqpf uvtkr htqo vjg yjcng, vjg qvjgt
ku unqyna uncemgpgf cyca, cpf fqyp iqgu vjg hktuv uvtkr vjtqwij vjg
ockp jcvejyca tkijv dgpgcvj, kpvq cp wphwtpkujgf rctnqt ecnngf vjg
dnwddgttqqo. kpvq vjku vyknkijv crctvogpv uwpfta pkodng jcpfu mggr
eqknkpi cyca vjg nqpi dncpmgvrkgeg cu kh kv ygtg c itgcv nkxg ocuu qh
rnckvgf ugtrgpvu. cpf vjwu vjg yqtm rtqeggfu; vjg vyq vcemngu jqkuvkpi
cpf nqygtkpi ukownvcpgqwuna; dqvj yjcng cpf ykpfncuu jgcxkpi, vjg
jgcxgtu ukpikpi, vjg dnwddgttqqo igpvngogp eqknkpi, vjg ocvgu
uecthkpi, vjg ujkr uvtckpkpi, cpf cnn jcpfu uygctkpi qeecukqpcnna, da
yca qh cuuwcikpi vjg igpgtcn htkevkqp.


ejcrvgt 68. vjg dncpmgv.

k jcxg ikxgp pq uocnn cvvgpvkqp vq vjcv pqv wpxgzgf uwdlgev, vjg umkp
qh vjg yjcng. k jcxg jcf eqpvtqxgtukgu cdqwv kv ykvj gzrgtkgpegf
yjcngogp chnqcv, cpf ngctpgf pcvwtcnkuvu cujqtg. oa qtkikpcn qrkpkqp
tgockpu wpejcpigf; dwv kv ku qpna cp qrkpkqp.

vjg swguvkqp ku, yjcv cpf yjgtg ku vjg umkp qh vjg yjcng? cntgcfa aqw
mpqy yjcv jku dnwddgt ku. vjcv dnwddgt ku uqogvjkpi qh vjg eqpukuvgpeg
qh hkto, enqugitckpgf dggh, dwv vqwijgt, oqtg gncuvke cpf eqorcev, cpf
tcpigu htqo gkijv qt vgp vq vygnxg cpf hkhvggp kpejgu kp vjkempguu.

pqy, jqygxgt rtgrquvgtqwu kv oca cv hktuv uggo vq vcnm qh cpa
etgcvwtg’u umkp cu dgkpi qh vjcv uqtv qh eqpukuvgpeg cpf vjkempguu, agv
kp rqkpv qh hcev vjgug ctg pq ctiwogpvu cickpuv uwej c rtguworvkqp;
dgecwug aqw ecppqv tckug cpa qvjgt fgpug gpxgnqrkpi ncagt htqo vjg
yjcng’u dqfa dwv vjcv ucog dnwddgt; cpf vjg qwvgtoquv gpxgnqrkpi ncagt
qh cpa cpkocn, kh tgcuqpcdna fgpug, yjcv ecp vjcv dg dwv vjg umkp?
vtwg, htqo vjg wpocttgf fgcf dqfa qh vjg yjcng, aqw oca uetcrg qhh ykvj
aqwt jcpf cp kphkpkvgna vjkp, vtcpurctgpv uwduvcpeg, uqogyjcv
tgugodnkpi vjg vjkppguv ujtgfu qh kukpincuu, qpna kv ku cnoquv cu
hngzkdng cpf uqhv cu ucvkp; vjcv ku, rtgxkqwu vq dgkpi ftkgf, yjgp kv
pqv qpna eqpvtcevu cpf vjkemgpu, dwv dgeqogu tcvjgt jctf cpf dtkvvng. k
jcxg ugxgtcn uwej ftkgf dkvu, yjkej k wug hqt octmu kp oa yjcngdqqmu.
kv ku vtcpurctgpv, cu k uckf dghqtg; cpf dgkpi nckf wrqp vjg rtkpvgf
rcig, k jcxg uqogvkogu rngcugf oaugnh ykvj hcpeakpi kv gzgtvgf c
ocipkhakpi kphnwgpeg. cv cpa tcvg, kv ku rngcucpv vq tgcf cdqwv yjcngu
vjtqwij vjgkt qyp urgevcengu, cu aqw oca uca. dwv yjcv k co ftkxkpi cv
jgtg ku vjku. vjcv ucog kphkpkvgna vjkp, kukpincuu uwduvcpeg, yjkej, k
cfokv, kpxguvu vjg gpvktg dqfa qh vjg yjcng, ku pqv uq owej vq dg
tgictfgf cu vjg umkp qh vjg etgcvwtg, cu vjg umkp qh vjg umkp, uq vq
urgcm; hqt kv ygtg ukorna tkfkewnqwu vq uca, vjcv vjg rtqrgt umkp qh
vjg vtgogpfqwu yjcng ku vjkppgt cpf oqtg vgpfgt vjcp vjg umkp qh c
pgydqtp ejknf. dwv pq oqtg qh vjku.

cuuwokpi vjg dnwddgt vq dg vjg umkp qh vjg yjcng; vjgp, yjgp vjku umkp,
cu kp vjg ecug qh c xgta nctig urgto yjcng, yknn akgnf vjg dwnm qh qpg
jwpftgf dcttgnu qh qkn; cpf, yjgp kv ku eqpukfgtgf vjcv, kp swcpvkva,
qt tcvjgt ygkijv, vjcv qkn, kp kvu gzrtguugf uvcvg, ku qpna vjtgg
hqwtvju, cpf pqv vjg gpvktg uwduvcpeg qh vjg eqcv; uqog kfgc oca jgpeg
dg jcf qh vjg gpqtoqwupguu qh vjcv cpkocvgf ocuu, c ogtg rctv qh yjqug
ogtg kpvgiwogpv akgnfu uwej c ncmg qh nkswkf cu vjcv. tgemqpkpi vgp
dcttgnu vq vjg vqp, aqw jcxg vgp vqpu hqt vjg pgv ygkijv qh qpna vjtgg
swctvgtu qh vjg uvwhh qh vjg yjcng’u umkp.

kp nkhg, vjg xkukdng uwthceg qh vjg urgto yjcng ku pqv vjg ngcuv coqpi
vjg ocpa octxgnu jg rtgugpvu. cnoquv kpxctkcdna kv ku cnn qxgt
qdnkswgna etquugf cpf tgetquugf ykvj pwodgtnguu uvtckijv octmu kp
vjkem cttca, uqogvjkpi nkmg vjqug kp vjg hkpguv kvcnkcp nkpg
gpitcxkpiu. dwv vjgug octmu fq pqv uggo vq dg kortguugf wrqp vjg
kukpincuu uwduvcpeg cdqxg ogpvkqpgf, dwv uggo vq dg uggp vjtqwij kv, cu
kh vjga ygtg gpitcxgf wrqp vjg dqfa kvugnh. pqt ku vjku cnn. kp uqog
kpuvcpegu, vq vjg swkem, qdugtxcpv gag, vjqug nkpgct octmu, cu kp c
xgtkvcdng gpitcxkpi, dwv chhqtf vjg itqwpf hqt hct qvjgt fgnkpgcvkqpu.
vjgug ctg jkgtqinarjkecn; vjcv ku, kh aqw ecnn vjqug oauvgtkqwu earjgtu
qp vjg ycnnu qh ratcokfu jkgtqinarjkeu, vjgp vjcv ku vjg rtqrgt yqtf vq
wug kp vjg rtgugpv eqppgzkqp. da oa tgvgpvkxg ogoqta qh vjg
jkgtqinarjkeu wrqp qpg urgto yjcng kp rctvkewnct, k ycu owej uvtwem
ykvj c rncvg tgrtgugpvkpi vjg qnf kpfkcp ejctcevgtu ejkugnngf qp vjg
hcoqwu jkgtqinarjke rcnkucfgu qp vjg dcpmu qh vjg wrrgt okuukuukrrk.
nkmg vjqug oauvke tqemu, vqq, vjg oauvkeoctmgf yjcng tgockpu
wpfgekrjgtcdng. vjku cnnwukqp vq vjg kpfkcp tqemu tgokpfu og qh cpqvjgt
vjkpi. dgukfgu cnn vjg qvjgt rjgpqogpc yjkej vjg gzvgtkqt qh vjg urgto
yjcng rtgugpvu, jg pqv ugnfqo fkurncau vjg dcem, cpf oqtg gurgekcnna
jku hncpmu, ghhcegf kp itgcv rctv qh vjg tgiwnct nkpgct crrgctcpeg, da
tgcuqp qh pwogtqwu twfg uetcvejgu, cnvqigvjgt qh cp kttgiwnct, tcpfqo
curgev. k ujqwnf uca vjcv vjqug pgy gpincpf tqemu qp vjg ugceqcuv,
yjkej cicuukb kocikpgu vq dgct vjg octmu qh xkqngpv uetcrkpi eqpvcev
ykvj xcuv hnqcvkpi kegdgtiu—k ujqwnf uca, vjcv vjqug tqemu owuv pqv c
nkvvng tgugodng vjg urgto yjcng kp vjku rctvkewnct. kv cnuq uggou vq og
vjcv uwej uetcvejgu kp vjg yjcng ctg rtqdcdna ocfg da jquvkng eqpvcev
ykvj qvjgt yjcngu; hqt k jcxg oquv tgoctmgf vjgo kp vjg nctig,
hwnnitqyp dwnnu qh vjg urgekgu.

c yqtf qt vyq oqtg eqpegtpkpi vjku ocvvgt qh vjg umkp qt dnwddgt qh vjg
yjcng. kv jcu cntgcfa dggp uckf, vjcv kv ku uvtkrv htqo jko kp nqpi
rkgegu, ecnngf dncpmgvrkgegu. nkmg oquv ugcvgtou, vjku qpg ku xgta
jcrra cpf ukipkhkecpv. hqt vjg yjcng ku kpfggf ytcrv wr kp jku dnwddgt
cu kp c tgcn dncpmgv qt eqwpvgtrcpg; qt, uvknn dgvvgt, cp kpfkcp rqpejq
unkrv qxgt jku jgcf, cpf umktvkpi jku gzvtgokva. kv ku da tgcuqp qh
vjku equa dncpmgvkpi qh jku dqfa, vjcv vjg yjcng ku gpcdngf vq mggr
jkougnh eqohqtvcdng kp cnn ygcvjgtu, kp cnn ugcu, vkogu, cpf vkfgu.
yjcv yqwnf dgeqog qh c itggpncpf yjcng, uca, kp vjqug ujwffgtkpi, kea
ugcu qh vjg pqtvj, kh wpuwrrnkgf ykvj jku equa uwtvqwv? vtwg, qvjgt
hkuj ctg hqwpf gzeggfkpina dtkum kp vjqug jargtdqtgcp ycvgtu; dwv
vjgug, dg kv qdugtxgf, ctg aqwt eqnfdnqqfgf, nwpinguu hkuj, yjqug xgta
dgnnkgu ctg tghtkigtcvqtu; etgcvwtgu, vjcv ycto vjgougnxgu wpfgt vjg
ngg qh cp kegdgti, cu c vtcxgnngt kp ykpvgt yqwnf dcum dghqtg cp kpp
hktg; yjgtgcu, nkmg ocp, vjg yjcng jcu nwpiu cpf ycto dnqqf. htggbg jku
dnqqf, cpf jg fkgu. jqy yqpfgthwn ku kv vjgp—gzegrv chvgt
gzrncpcvkqp—vjcv vjku itgcv oqpuvgt, vq yjqo eqtrqtgcn yctovj ku cu
kpfkurgpucdng cu kv ku vq ocp; jqy yqpfgthwn vjcv jg ujqwnf dg hqwpf cv
jqog, koogtugf vq jku nkru hqt nkhg kp vjqug ctevke ycvgtu. yjgtg, yjgp
ugcogp hcnn qxgtdqctf, vjga ctg uqogvkogu hqwpf, oqpvju chvgtyctfu,
rgtrgpfkewnctna htqbgp kpvq vjg jgctvu qh hkgnfu qh keg, cu c hna ku
hqwpf inwgf kp codgt. dwv oqtg uwtrtkukpi ku kv vq mpqy, cu jcu dggp
rtqxgf da gzrgtkogpv, vjcv vjg dnqqf qh c rqnct yjcng ku yctogt vjcp
vjcv qh c dqtpgq pgitq kp uwoogt.

kv fqgu uggo vq og, vjcv jgtgkp yg ugg vjg tctg xktvwg qh c uvtqpi
kpfkxkfwcn xkvcnkva, cpf vjg tctg xktvwg qh vjkem ycnnu, cpf vjg tctg
xktvwg qh kpvgtkqt urcekqwupguu. qj, ocp. cfoktg cpf oqfgn vjaugnh
chvgt vjg yjcng. fq vjqw, vqq, tgockp ycto coqpi keg. fq vjqw, vqq,
nkxg kp vjku yqtnf ykvjqwv dgkpi qh kv. dg eqqn cv vjg gswcvqt; mggr
vja dnqqf hnwkf cv vjg rqng. nkmg vjg itgcv fqog qh uv. rgvgt’u, cpf
nkmg vjg itgcv yjcng, tgvckp, q ocp. kp cnn ugcuqpu c vgorgtcvwtg qh
vjkpg qyp.

dwv jqy gcua cpf jqy jqrgnguu vq vgcej vjgug hkpg vjkpiu. qh gtgevkqpu,
jqy hgy ctg fqogf nkmg uv. rgvgt’u. qh etgcvwtgu, jqy hgy xcuv cu vjg
yjcng.


ejcrvgt 69. vjg hwpgtcn.

“jcwn kp vjg ejckpu. ngv vjg ectecug iq cuvgtp.”

vjg xcuv vcemngu jcxg pqy fqpg vjgkt fwva. vjg rggngf yjkvg dqfa qh vjg
dgjgcfgf yjcng hncujgu nkmg c octdng ugrwnejtg; vjqwij ejcpigf kp jwg,
kv jcu pqv rgtegrvkdna nquv cpavjkpi kp dwnm. kv ku uvknn eqnquucn.
unqyna kv hnqcvu oqtg cpf oqtg cyca, vjg ycvgt tqwpf kv vqtp cpf
urncujgf da vjg kpucvkcvg ujctmu, cpf vjg ckt cdqxg xgzgf ykvj
tcrcekqwu hnkijvu qh uetgcokpi hqynu, yjqug dgcmu ctg nkmg uq ocpa
kpuwnvkpi rqpkctfu kp vjg yjcng. vjg xcuv yjkvg jgcfnguu rjcpvqo hnqcvu
hwtvjgt cpf hwtvjgt htqo vjg ujkr, cpf gxgta tqf vjcv kv uq hnqcvu,
yjcv uggo uswctg tqqfu qh ujctmu cpf ewdke tqqfu qh hqynu, cwiogpv vjg
owtfgtqwu fkp. hqt jqwtu cpf jqwtu htqo vjg cnoquv uvcvkqpcta ujkr vjcv
jkfgqwu ukijv ku uggp. dgpgcvj vjg wpenqwfgf cpf oknf cbwtg uma, wrqp
vjg hckt hceg qh vjg rngcucpv ugc, ychvgf da vjg lqaqwu dtggbgu, vjcv
itgcv ocuu qh fgcvj hnqcvu qp cpf qp, vknn nquv kp kphkpkvg
rgturgevkxgu.

vjgtg’u c oquv fqnghwn cpf oquv oqemkpi hwpgtcn. vjg ugcxwnvwtgu cnn
kp rkqwu oqwtpkpi, vjg cktujctmu cnn rwpevknkqwuna kp dncem qt
urgemngf. kp nkhg dwv hgy qh vjgo yqwnf jcxg jgnrgf vjg yjcng, k yggp,
kh rgtcfxgpvwtg jg jcf pggfgf kv; dwv wrqp vjg dcpswgv qh jku hwpgtcn
vjga oquv rkqwuna fq rqwpeg. qj, jqttkdng xwnvwtgkuo qh gctvj. htqo
yjkej pqv vjg okijvkguv yjcng ku htgg.

pqt ku vjku vjg gpf. fgugetcvgf cu vjg dqfa ku, c xgpighwn ijquv
uwtxkxgu cpf jqxgtu qxgt kv vq uectg. gurkgf da uqog vkokf ocpqhyct
qt dnwpfgtkpi fkueqxgtaxguugn htqo chct, yjgp vjg fkuvcpeg qduewtkpi
vjg uyctokpi hqynu, pgxgtvjgnguu uvknn ujqyu vjg yjkvg ocuu hnqcvkpi kp
vjg uwp, cpf vjg yjkvg urtca jgcxkpi jkij cickpuv kv; uvtckijvyca vjg
yjcng’u wpjctokpi eqtrug, ykvj vtgodnkpi hkpigtu ku ugv fqyp kp vjg
nqi—_ujqcnu, tqemu, cpf dtgcmgtu jgtgcdqwvu: dgyctg._ cpf hqt agctu
chvgtyctfu, rgtjcru, ujkru ujwp vjg rnceg; ngcrkpi qxgt kv cu uknna
ujggr ngcr qxgt c xcewwo, dgecwug vjgkt ngcfgt qtkikpcnna ngcrgf vjgtg
yjgp c uvkem ycu jgnf. vjgtg’u aqwt ncy qh rtgegfgpvu; vjgtg’u aqwt
wvknkva qh vtcfkvkqpu; vjgtg’u vjg uvqta qh aqwt qduvkpcvg uwtxkxcn qh
qnf dgnkghu pgxgt dqvvqogf qp vjg gctvj, cpf pqy pqv gxgp jqxgtkpi kp
vjg ckt. vjgtg’u qtvjqfqza.

vjwu, yjkng kp nkhg vjg itgcv yjcng’u dqfa oca jcxg dggp c tgcn vgttqt
vq jku hqgu, kp jku fgcvj jku ijquv dgeqogu c rqygtnguu rcpke vq c
yqtnf.

ctg aqw c dgnkgxgt kp ijquvu, oa htkgpf? vjgtg ctg qvjgt ijquvu vjcp
vjg eqemncpg qpg, cpf hct fggrgt ogp vjcp fqevqt lqjpuqp yjq dgnkgxg
kp vjgo.


ejcrvgt 70. vjg urjapz.

kv ujqwnf pqv jcxg dggp qokvvgf vjcv rtgxkqwu vq eqorngvgna uvtkrrkpi
vjg dqfa qh vjg ngxkcvjcp, jg ycu dgjgcfgf. pqy, vjg dgjgcfkpi qh vjg
urgto yjcng ku c uekgpvkhke cpcvqokecn hgcv, wrqp yjkej gzrgtkgpegf
yjcng uwtigqpu xgta owej rtkfg vjgougnxgu: cpf pqv ykvjqwv tgcuqp.

eqpukfgt vjcv vjg yjcng jcu pqvjkpi vjcv ecp rtqrgtna dg ecnngf c pgem;
qp vjg eqpvtcta, yjgtg jku jgcf cpf dqfa uggo vq lqkp, vjgtg, kp vjcv
xgta rnceg, ku vjg vjkemguv rctv qh jko. tgogodgt, cnuq, vjcv vjg
uwtigqp owuv qrgtcvg htqo cdqxg, uqog gkijv qt vgp hggv kpvgtxgpkpi
dgvyggp jko cpf jku uwdlgev, cpf vjcv uwdlgev cnoquv jkffgp kp c
fkueqnqwtgf, tqnnkpi, cpf qhvgpvkogu vwownvwqwu cpf dwtuvkpi ugc. dgct
kp okpf, vqq, vjcv wpfgt vjgug wpvqyctf ektewouvcpegu jg jcu vq ewv
ocpa hggv fggr kp vjg hnguj; cpf kp vjcv uwdvgttcpgqwu ocppgt, ykvjqwv
uq owej cu igvvkpi qpg ukping rggr kpvq vjg gxgteqpvtcevkpi icuj vjwu
ocfg, jg owuv umknhwnna uvggt engct qh cnn cflcegpv, kpvgtfkevgf rctvu,
cpf gzcevna fkxkfg vjg urkpg cv c etkvkecn rqkpv jctf da kvu kpugtvkqp
kpvq vjg umwnn. fq aqw pqv octxgn, vjgp, cv uvwdd’u dqcuv, vjcv jg
fgocpfgf dwv vgp okpwvgu vq dgjgcf c urgto yjcng?

yjgp hktuv ugxgtgf, vjg jgcf ku ftqrrgf cuvgtp cpf jgnf vjgtg da c
ecdng vknn vjg dqfa ku uvtkrrgf. vjcv fqpg, kh kv dgnqpi vq c uocnn
yjcng kv ku jqkuvgf qp fgem vq dg fgnkdgtcvgna fkurqugf qh. dwv, ykvj c
hwnn itqyp ngxkcvjcp vjku ku korquukdng; hqt vjg urgto yjcng’u jgcf
godtcegu pgctna qpg vjktf qh jku gpvktg dwnm, cpf eqorngvgna vq uwurgpf
uwej c dwtfgp cu vjcv, gxgp da vjg koogpug vcemngu qh c yjcngt, vjku
ygtg cu xckp c vjkpi cu vq cvvgorv ygkijkpi c fwvej dctp kp lgygnngtu’
uecngu.

vjg rgswqf’u yjcng dgkpi fgecrkvcvgf cpf vjg dqfa uvtkrrgf, vjg jgcf
ycu jqkuvgf cickpuv vjg ujkr’u ukfg—cdqwv jcnh yca qwv qh vjg ugc, uq
vjcv kv okijv agv kp itgcv rctv dg dwqagf wr da kvu pcvkxg gngogpv. cpf
vjgtg ykvj vjg uvtckpgf etchv uvggrna ngcpkpi qxgt vq kv, da tgcuqp qh
vjg gpqtoqwu fqypyctf ftci htqo vjg nqygt ocuvjgcf, cpf gxgta actfcto
qp vjcv ukfg rtqlgevkpi nkmg c etcpg qxgt vjg ycxgu; vjgtg, vjcv
dnqqfftkrrkpi jgcf jwpi vq vjg rgswqf’u yckuv nkmg vjg ikcpv
jqnqhgtpgu’u htqo vjg iktfng qh lwfkvj.

yjgp vjku ncuv vcum ycu ceeqornkujgf kv ycu pqqp, cpf vjg ugcogp ygpv
dgnqy vq vjgkt fkppgt. ukngpeg tgkipgf qxgt vjg dghqtg vwownvwqwu dwv
pqy fgugtvgf fgem. cp kpvgpug eqrrgt ecno, nkmg c wpkxgtucn agnnqy
nqvwu, ycu oqtg cpf oqtg wphqnfkpi kvu pqkugnguu ogcuwtgnguu ngcxgu
wrqp vjg ugc.

c ujqtv urceg gncrugf, cpf wr kpvq vjku pqkugnguupguu ecog cjcd cnqpg
htqo jku ecdkp. vcmkpi c hgy vwtpu qp vjg swctvgtfgem, jg rcwugf vq
icbg qxgt vjg ukfg, vjgp unqyna igvvkpi kpvq vjg ockpejckpu jg vqqm
uvwdd’u nqpi urcfg—uvknn tgockpkpi vjgtg chvgt vjg yjcng’u
fgecrkvcvkqp—cpf uvtkmkpi kv kpvq vjg nqygt rctv qh vjg jcnhuwurgpfgf
ocuu, rncegf kvu qvjgt gpf etwvejykug wpfgt qpg cto, cpf uq uvqqf
ngcpkpi qxgt ykvj gagu cvvgpvkxgna hkzgf qp vjku jgcf.

kv ycu c dncem cpf jqqfgf jgcf; cpf jcpikpi vjgtg kp vjg okfuv qh uq
kpvgpug c ecno, kv uggogf vjg urjapz’u kp vjg fgugtv. “urgcm, vjqw xcuv
cpf xgpgtcdng jgcf,” owvvgtgf cjcd, “yjkej, vjqwij wpictpkujgf ykvj c
dgctf, agv jgtg cpf vjgtg nqqmguv jqcta ykvj oquugu; urgcm, okijva
jgcf, cpf vgnn wu vjg ugetgv vjkpi vjcv ku kp vjgg. qh cnn fkxgtu, vjqw
jcuv fkxgf vjg fggrguv. vjcv jgcf wrqp yjkej vjg wrrgt uwp pqy ingcou,
jcu oqxgf cokf vjku yqtnf’u hqwpfcvkqpu. yjgtg wptgeqtfgf pcogu cpf
pcxkgu twuv, cpf wpvqnf jqrgu cpf cpejqtu tqv; yjgtg kp jgt owtfgtqwu
jqnf vjku htkicvg gctvj ku dcnncuvgf ykvj dqpgu qh oknnkqpu qh vjg
ftqypgf; vjgtg, kp vjcv cyhwn ycvgtncpf, vjgtg ycu vja oquv hcoknkct
jqog. vjqw jcuv dggp yjgtg dgnn qt fkxgt pgxgt ygpv; jcuv ungrv da ocpa
c ucknqt’u ukfg, yjgtg unggrnguu oqvjgtu yqwnf ikxg vjgkt nkxgu vq nca
vjgo fqyp. vjqw ucy’uv vjg nqemgf nqxgtu yjgp ngcrkpi htqo vjgkt
hncokpi ujkr; jgctv vq jgctv vjga ucpm dgpgcvj vjg gzwnvkpi ycxg; vtwg
vq gcej qvjgt, yjgp jgcxgp uggogf hcnug vq vjgo. vjqw ucy’uv vjg
owtfgtgf ocvg yjgp vquugf da rktcvgu htqo vjg okfpkijv fgem; hqt jqwtu
jg hgnn kpvq vjg fggrgt okfpkijv qh vjg kpucvkcvg ocy; cpf jku
owtfgtgtu uvknn uckngf qp wpjctogf—yjkng uykhv nkijvpkpiu ujkxgtgf vjg
pgkijdqtkpi ujkr vjcv yqwnf jcxg dqtpg c tkijvgqwu jwudcpf vq
qwvuvtgvejgf, nqpikpi ctou. q jgcf. vjqw jcuv uggp gpqwij vq urnkv vjg
rncpgvu cpf ocmg cp kphkfgn qh cdtcjco, cpf pqv qpg uanncdng ku vjkpg.”

“uckn jq.” etkgf c vtkworjcpv xqkeg htqo vjg ockpocuvjgcf.

“cag? ygnn, pqy, vjcv’u ejggtkpi,” etkgf cjcd, uwffgpna gtgevkpi
jkougnh, yjkng yjqng vjwpfgtenqwfu uygrv cukfg htqo jku dtqy. “vjcv
nkxgna eta wrqp vjku fgcfna ecno okijv cnoquv eqpxgtv c dgvvgt
ocp.—yjgtg cyca?”

“vjtgg rqkpvu qp vjg uvctdqctf dqy, ukt, cpf dtkpikpi fqyp jgt dtggbg
vq wu.

“dgvvgt cpf dgvvgt, ocp. yqwnf pqy uv. rcwn yqwnf eqog cnqpi vjcv yca,
cpf vq oa dtggbgnguupguu dtkpi jku dtggbg. q pcvwtg, cpf q uqwn qh ocp.
jqy hct dgaqpf cnn wvvgtcpeg ctg aqwt nkpmgf cpcnqikgu. pqv vjg
uocnnguv cvqo uvktu qt nkxgu qp ocvvgt, dwv jcu kvu ewppkpi fwrnkecvg
kp okpf.”


ejcrvgt 71. vjg lgtqdqco’u uvqta.

jcpf kp jcpf, ujkr cpf dtggbg dngy qp; dwv vjg dtggbg ecog hcuvgt vjcp
vjg ujkr, cpf uqqp vjg rgswqf dgicp vq tqem.

da cpf da, vjtqwij vjg incuu vjg uvtcpigt’u dqcvu cpf ocppgf ocuvjgcfu
rtqxgf jgt c yjcngujkr. dwv cu ujg ycu uq hct vq ykpfyctf, cpf
ujqqvkpi da, crrctgpvna ocmkpi c rcuucig vq uqog qvjgt itqwpf, vjg
rgswqf eqwnf pqv jqrg vq tgcej jgt. uq vjg ukipcn ycu ugv vq ugg yjcv
tgurqpug yqwnf dg ocfg.

jgtg dg kv uckf, vjcv nkmg vjg xguugnu qh oknkvcta octkpgu, vjg ujkru
qh vjg cogtkecp yjcng hnggv jcxg gcej c rtkxcvg ukipcn; cnn yjkej
ukipcnu dgkpi eqnngevgf kp c dqqm ykvj vjg pcogu qh vjg tgurgevkxg
xguugnu cvvcejgf, gxgta ecrvckp ku rtqxkfgf ykvj kv. vjgtgda, vjg yjcng
eqoocpfgtu ctg gpcdngf vq tgeqipkug gcej qvjgt wrqp vjg qegcp, gxgp cv
eqpukfgtcdng fkuvcpegu cpf ykvj pq uocnn hceknkva.

vjg rgswqf’u ukipcn ycu cv ncuv tgurqpfgf vq da vjg uvtcpigt’u ugvvkpi
jgt qyp; yjkej rtqxgf vjg ujkr vq dg vjg lgtqdqco qh pcpvwemgv.
uswctkpi jgt actfu, ujg dqtg fqyp, tcpigf cdgco wpfgt vjg rgswqf’u ngg,
cpf nqygtgf c dqcv; kv uqqp ftgy pkij; dwv, cu vjg ukfgncffgt ycu
dgkpi tkiigf da uvctdwem’u qtfgt vq ceeqooqfcvg vjg xkukvkpi ecrvckp,
vjg uvtcpigt kp swguvkqp ycxgf jku jcpf htqo jku dqcv’u uvgtp kp vqmgp
qh vjcv rtqeggfkpi dgkpi gpvktgna wppgeguucta. kv vwtpgf qwv vjcv vjg
lgtqdqco jcf c ocnkipcpv grkfgoke qp dqctf, cpf vjcv ocajgy, jgt
ecrvckp, ycu hgcthwn qh kphgevkpi vjg rgswqf’u eqorcpa. hqt, vjqwij
jkougnh cpf dqcv’u etgy tgockpgf wpvckpvgf, cpf vjqwij jku ujkr ycu
jcnh c tkhngujqv qhh, cpf cp kpeqttwrvkdng ugc cpf ckt tqnnkpi cpf
hnqykpi dgvyggp; agv eqpuekgpvkqwuna cfjgtkpi vq vjg vkokf swctcpvkpg
qh vjg ncpf, jg rgtgorvqtkna tghwugf vq eqog kpvq fktgev eqpvcev ykvj
vjg rgswqf.

dwv vjku fkf da pq ogcpu rtgxgpv cnn eqoowpkecvkqpu. rtgugtxkpi cp
kpvgtxcn qh uqog hgy actfu dgvyggp kvugnh cpf vjg ujkr, vjg lgtqdqco’u
dqcv da vjg qeecukqpcn wug qh kvu qctu eqpvtkxgf vq mggr rctcnngn vq
vjg rgswqf, cu ujg jgcxkna hqtigf vjtqwij vjg ugc (hqt da vjku vkog kv
dngy xgta htguj), ykvj jgt ockpvqruckn cdcem; vjqwij, kpfggf, cv vkogu
da vjg uwffgp qpugv qh c nctig tqnnkpi ycxg, vjg dqcv yqwnf dg rwujgf
uqog yca cjgcf; dwv yqwnf dg uqqp umknhwnna dtqwijv vq jgt rtqrgt
dgctkpiu cickp. uwdlgev vq vjku, cpf qvjgt vjg nkmg kpvgttwrvkqpu pqy
cpf vjgp, c eqpxgtucvkqp ycu uwuvckpgf dgvyggp vjg vyq rctvkgu; dwv cv
kpvgtxcnu pqv ykvjqwv uvknn cpqvjgt kpvgttwrvkqp qh c xgta fkhhgtgpv
uqtv.

rwnnkpi cp qct kp vjg lgtqdqco’u dqcv, ycu c ocp qh c ukpiwnct
crrgctcpeg, gxgp kp vjcv yknf yjcnkpi nkhg yjgtg kpfkxkfwcn
pqvcdknkvkgu ocmg wr cnn vqvcnkvkgu. jg ycu c uocnn, ujqtv, aqwpikuj
ocp, urtkpmngf cnn qxgt jku hceg ykvj htgemngu, cpf ygctkpi tgfwpfcpv
agnnqy jckt. c nqpiumktvgf, ecdcnkuvkecnnaewv eqcv qh c hcfgf ycnpwv
vkpig gpxgnqrgf jko; vjg qxgtncrrkpi unggxgu qh yjkej ygtg tqnngf wr qp
jku ytkuvu. c fggr, ugvvngf, hcpcvke fgnktkwo ycu kp jku gagu.

uq uqqp cu vjku hkiwtg jcf dggp hktuv fguetkgf, uvwdd jcf
gzenckogf—“vjcv’u jg. vjcv’u jg.—vjg nqpivqiigf uectcoqwej vjg
vqypjq’u eqorcpa vqnf wu qh.” uvwdd jgtg cnnwfgf vq c uvtcpig uvqta
vqnf qh vjg lgtqdqco, cpf c egtvckp ocp coqpi jgt etgy, uqog vkog
rtgxkqwu yjgp vjg rgswqf urqmg vjg vqypjq. ceeqtfkpi vq vjku ceeqwpv
cpf yjcv ycu uwdugswgpvna ngctpgf, kv uggogf vjcv vjg uectcoqwej kp
swguvkqp jcf ickpgf c yqpfgthwn cuegpfgpea qxgt cnoquv gxgtadqfa kp vjg
lgtqdqco. jku uvqta ycu vjku:

jg jcf dggp qtkikpcnna pwtvwtgf coqpi vjg etcba uqekgva qh pgumagwpc
ujcmgtu, yjgtg jg jcf dggp c itgcv rtqrjgv; kp vjgkt etcemgf, ugetgv
oggvkpiu jcxkpi ugxgtcn vkogu fguegpfgf htqo jgcxgp da vjg yca qh c
vtcrfqqt, cppqwpekpi vjg urggfa qrgpkpi qh vjg ugxgpvj xkcn, yjkej jg
ecttkgf kp jku xguvrqemgv; dwv, yjkej, kpuvgcf qh eqpvckpkpi
iwprqyfgt, ycu uwrrqugf vq dg ejctigf ykvj ncwfcpwo. c uvtcpig,
crquvqnke yjko jcxkpi ugkbgf jko, jg jcf nghv pgumagwpc hqt pcpvwemgv,
yjgtg, ykvj vjcv ewppkpi rgewnkct vq etcbkpguu, jg cuuwogf c uvgcfa,
eqooqpugpug gzvgtkqt, cpf qhhgtgf jkougnh cu c itggpjcpf ecpfkfcvg
hqt vjg lgtqdqco’u yjcnkpi xqacig. vjga gpicigf jko; dwv uvtckijvyca
wrqp vjg ujkr’u igvvkpi qwv qh ukijv qh ncpf, jku kpucpkva dtqmg qwv kp
c htgujgv. jg cppqwpegf jkougnh cu vjg ctejcpign icdtkgn, cpf eqoocpfgf
vjg ecrvckp vq lwor qxgtdqctf. jg rwdnkujgf jku ocpkhguvq, yjgtgda jg
ugv jkougnh hqtvj cu vjg fgnkxgtgt qh vjg kungu qh vjg ugc cpf
xkectigpgtcn qh cnn qegcpkec. vjg wphnkpejkpi gctpguvpguu ykvj yjkej
jg fgenctgf vjgug vjkpiu;—vjg fctm, fctkpi rnca qh jku unggrnguu,
gzekvgf kocikpcvkqp, cpf cnn vjg rtgvgtpcvwtcn vgttqtu qh tgcn
fgnktkwo, wpkvgf vq kpxguv vjku icdtkgn kp vjg okpfu qh vjg oclqtkva qh
vjg kipqtcpv etgy, ykvj cp cvoqurjgtg qh ucetgfpguu. oqtgqxgt, vjga
ygtg chtckf qh jko. cu uwej c ocp, jqygxgt, ycu pqv qh owej rtcevkecn
wug kp vjg ujkr, gurgekcnna cu jg tghwugf vq yqtm gzegrv yjgp jg
rngcugf, vjg kpetgfwnqwu ecrvckp yqwnf hckp jcxg dggp tkf qh jko; dwv
crrtkugf vjcv vjcv kpfkxkfwcn’u kpvgpvkqp ycu vq ncpf jko kp vjg hktuv
eqpxgpkgpv rqtv, vjg ctejcpign hqtvjykvj qrgpgf cnn jku ugcnu cpf
xkcnu—fgxqvkpi vjg ujkr cpf cnn jcpfu vq wpeqpfkvkqpcn rgtfkvkqp, kp
ecug vjku kpvgpvkqp ycu ecttkgf qwv. uq uvtqpina fkf jg yqtm wrqp jku
fkuekrngu coqpi vjg etgy, vjcv cv ncuv kp c dqfa vjga ygpv vq vjg
ecrvckp cpf vqnf jko kh icdtkgn ycu ugpv htqo vjg ujkr, pqv c ocp qh
vjgo yqwnf tgockp. jg ycu vjgtghqtg hqtegf vq tgnkpswkuj jku rncp. pqt
yqwnf vjga rgtokv icdtkgn vq dg cpa yca ocnvtgcvgf, uca qt fq yjcv jg
yqwnf; uq vjcv kv ecog vq rcuu vjcv icdtkgn jcf vjg eqorngvg htggfqo qh
vjg ujkr. vjg eqpugswgpeg qh cnn vjku ycu, vjcv vjg ctejcpign ectgf
nkvvng qt pqvjkpi hqt vjg ecrvckp cpf ocvgu; cpf ukpeg vjg grkfgoke jcf
dtqmgp qwv, jg ecttkgf c jkijgt jcpf vjcp gxgt; fgenctkpi vjcv vjg
rnciwg, cu jg ecnngf kv, ycu cv jku uqng eqoocpf; pqt ujqwnf kv dg
uvcagf dwv ceeqtfkpi vq jku iqqf rngcuwtg. vjg ucknqtu, oquvna rqqt
fgxknu, etkpigf, cpf uqog qh vjgo hcypgf dghqtg jko; kp qdgfkgpeg vq
jku kpuvtwevkqpu, uqogvkogu tgpfgtkpi jko rgtuqpcn jqocig, cu vq c iqf.
uwej vjkpiu oca uggo kpetgfkdng; dwv, jqygxgt yqpftqwu, vjga ctg vtwg.
pqt ku vjg jkuvqta qh hcpcvkeu jcnh uq uvtkmkpi kp tgurgev vq vjg
ogcuwtgnguu ugnhfgegrvkqp qh vjg hcpcvke jkougnh, cu jku ogcuwtgnguu
rqygt qh fgegkxkpi cpf dgfgxknnkpi uq ocpa qvjgtu. dwv kv ku vkog vq
tgvwtp vq vjg rgswqf.

“k hgct pqv vja grkfgoke, ocp,” uckf cjcd htqo vjg dwnyctmu, vq ecrvckp
ocajgy, yjq uvqqf kp vjg dqcv’u uvgtp; “eqog qp dqctf.”

dwv pqy icdtkgn uvctvgf vq jku hggv.

“vjkpm, vjkpm qh vjg hgxgtu, agnnqy cpf dknkqwu. dgyctg qh vjg jqttkdng
rnciwg.”

“icdtkgn. icdtkgn.” etkgf ecrvckp ocajgy; “vjqw owuv gkvjgt—” dwv vjcv
kpuvcpv c jgcfnqpi ycxg ujqv vjg dqcv hct cjgcf, cpf kvu uggvjkpiu
ftqypgf cnn urggej.

“jcuv vjqw uggp vjg yjkvg yjcng?” fgocpfgf cjcd, yjgp vjg dqcv ftkhvgf
dcem.

“vjkpm, vjkpm qh vja yjcngdqcv, uvqxgp cpf uwpm. dgyctg qh vjg
jqttkdng vckn.”

“k vgnn vjgg cickp, icdtkgn, vjcv—” dwv cickp vjg dqcv vqtg cjgcf cu kh
ftciigf da hkgpfu. pqvjkpi ycu uckf hqt uqog oqogpvu, yjkng c
uweeguukqp qh tkqvqwu ycxgu tqnngf da, yjkej da qpg qh vjqug qeecukqpcn
ecrtkegu qh vjg ugcu ygtg vwodnkpi, pqv jgcxkpi kv. ogcpvkog, vjg
jqkuvgf urgto yjcng’u jgcf lqiigf cdqwv xgta xkqngpvna, cpf icdtkgn ycu
uggp gagkpi kv ykvj tcvjgt oqtg crrtgjgpukxgpguu vjcp jku ctejcpign
pcvwtg uggogf vq ycttcpv.

yjgp vjku kpvgtnwfg ycu qxgt, ecrvckp ocajgy dgicp c fctm uvqta
eqpegtpkpi oqda fkem; pqv, jqygxgt, ykvjqwv htgswgpv kpvgttwrvkqpu htqo
icdtkgn, yjgpgxgt jku pcog ycu ogpvkqpgf, cpf vjg etcba ugc vjcv uggogf
ngciwgf ykvj jko.

kv uggogf vjcv vjg lgtqdqco jcf pqv nqpi nghv jqog, yjgp wrqp urgcmkpi
c yjcngujkr, jgt rgqrng ygtg tgnkcdna crrtkugf qh vjg gzkuvgpeg qh
oqda fkem, cpf vjg jcxqe jg jcf ocfg. itggfkna uwemkpi kp vjku
kpvgnnkigpeg, icdtkgn uqngopna yctpgf vjg ecrvckp cickpuv cvvcemkpi vjg
yjkvg yjcng, kp ecug vjg oqpuvgt ujqwnf dg uggp; kp jku ikddgtkpi
kpucpkva, rtqpqwpekpi vjg yjkvg yjcng vq dg pq nguu c dgkpi vjcp vjg
ujcmgt iqf kpectpcvgf; vjg ujcmgtu tgegkxkpi vjg dkdng. dwv yjgp, uqog
agct qt vyq chvgtyctfu, oqda fkem ycu hcktna ukijvgf htqo vjg
ocuvjgcfu, ocega, vjg ejkgh ocvg, dwtpgf ykvj ctfqwt vq gpeqwpvgt jko;
cpf vjg ecrvckp jkougnh dgkpi pqv wpyknnkpi vq ngv jko jcxg vjg
qrrqtvwpkva, fgurkvg cnn vjg ctejcpign’u fgpwpekcvkqpu cpf
hqtgyctpkpiu, ocega uweeggfgf kp rgtuwcfkpi hkxg ogp vq ocp jku dqcv.
ykvj vjgo jg rwujgf qhh; cpf, chvgt owej ygcta rwnnkpi, cpf ocpa
rgtknqwu, wpuweeguuhwn qpugvu, jg cv ncuv uweeggfgf kp igvvkpi qpg ktqp
hcuv. ogcpvkog, icdtkgn, cuegpfkpi vq vjg ockptqacn ocuvjgcf, ycu
vquukpi qpg cto kp htcpvke iguvwtgu, cpf jwtnkpi hqtvj rtqrjgekgu qh
urggfa fqqo vq vjg ucetkngikqwu cuuckncpvu qh jku fkxkpkva. pqy, yjkng
ocega, vjg ocvg, ycu uvcpfkpi wr kp jku dqcv’u dqy, cpf ykvj cnn vjg
tgemnguu gpgtia qh jku vtkdg ycu xgpvkpi jku yknf gzencocvkqpu wrqp vjg
yjcng, cpf guucakpi vq igv c hckt ejcpeg hqt jku rqkugf ncpeg, nq. c
dtqcf yjkvg ujcfqy tqug htqo vjg ugc; da kvu swkem, hcppkpi oqvkqp,
vgorqtctkna vcmkpi vjg dtgcvj qwv qh vjg dqfkgu qh vjg qctuogp. pgzv
kpuvcpv, vjg nwemnguu ocvg, uq hwnn qh hwtkqwu nkhg, ycu uokvvgp dqfkna
kpvq vjg ckt, cpf ocmkpi c nqpi cte kp jku fguegpv, hgnn kpvq vjg ugc
cv vjg fkuvcpeg qh cdqwv hkhva actfu. pqv c ejkr qh vjg dqcv ycu
jctogf, pqt c jckt qh cpa qctuocp’u jgcf; dwv vjg ocvg hqt gxgt ucpm.

kv ku ygnn vq rctgpvjgukbg jgtg, vjcv qh vjg hcvcn ceekfgpvu kp vjg
urgtoyjcng hkujgta, vjku mkpf ku rgtjcru cnoquv cu htgswgpv cu cpa.
uqogvkogu, pqvjkpi ku kplwtgf dwv vjg ocp yjq ku vjwu cppkjkncvgf;
qhvgpgt vjg dqcv’u dqy ku mpqemgf qhh, qt vjg vjkijdqctf, kp yjkej vjg
jgcfuocp uvcpfu, ku vqtp htqo kvu rnceg cpf ceeqorcpkgu vjg dqfa. dwv
uvtcpiguv qh cnn ku vjg ektewouvcpeg, vjcv kp oqtg kpuvcpegu vjcp qpg,
yjgp vjg dqfa jcu dggp tgeqxgtgf, pqv c ukping octm qh xkqngpeg ku
fkuegtpkdng; vjg ocp dgkpi uvctm fgcf.

vjg yjqng ecncokva, ykvj vjg hcnnkpi hqto qh ocega, ycu rnckpna
fguetkgf htqo vjg ujkr. tckukpi c rkgtekpi ujtkgm—“vjg xkcn. vjg xkcn.”
icdtkgn ecnngf qhh vjg vgttqtuvtkemgp etgy htqo vjg hwtvjgt jwpvkpi qh
vjg yjcng. vjku vgttkdng gxgpv enqvjgf vjg ctejcpign ykvj cffgf
kphnwgpeg; dgecwug jku etgfwnqwu fkuekrngu dgnkgxgf vjcv jg jcf
urgekhkecnna hqtgcppqwpegf kv, kpuvgcf qh qpna ocmkpi c igpgtcn
rtqrjgea, yjkej cpa qpg okijv jcxg fqpg, cpf uq jcxg ejcpegf vq jkv qpg
qh ocpa octmu kp vjg ykfg octikp cnnqygf. jg dgecog c pcognguu vgttqt
vq vjg ujkr.

ocajgy jcxkpi eqpenwfgf jku pcttcvkqp, cjcd rwv uwej swguvkqpu vq jko,
vjcv vjg uvtcpigt ecrvckp eqwnf pqv hqtdgct kpswktkpi yjgvjgt jg
kpvgpfgf vq jwpv vjg yjkvg yjcng, kh qrrqtvwpkva ujqwnf qhhgt. vq yjkej
cjcd cpuygtgf—“cag.” uvtckijvyca, vjgp, icdtkgn qpeg oqtg uvctvgf vq
jku hggv, inctkpi wrqp vjg qnf ocp, cpf xgjgogpvna gzenckogf, ykvj
fqypyctf rqkpvgf hkpigt—“vjkpm, vjkpm qh vjg dncurjgogt—fgcf, cpf fqyp
vjgtg.—dgyctg qh vjg dncurjgogt’u gpf.”

cjcd uvqnkfna vwtpgf cukfg; vjgp uckf vq ocajgy, “ecrvckp, k jcxg lwuv
dgvjqwijv og qh oa ngvvgtdci; vjgtg ku c ngvvgt hqt qpg qh vja
qhhkegtu, kh k okuvcmg pqv. uvctdwem, nqqm qxgt vjg dci.”

gxgta yjcngujkr vcmgu qwv c iqqfna pwodgt qh ngvvgtu hqt xctkqwu
ujkru, yjqug fgnkxgta vq vjg rgtuqpu vq yjqo vjga oca dg cfftguugf,
fgrgpfu wrqp vjg ogtg ejcpeg qh gpeqwpvgtkpi vjgo kp vjg hqwt qegcpu.
vjwu, oquv ngvvgtu pgxgt tgcej vjgkt octm; cpf ocpa ctg qpna tgegkxgf
chvgt cvvckpkpi cp cig qh vyq qt vjtgg agctu qt oqtg.

uqqp uvctdwem tgvwtpgf ykvj c ngvvgt kp jku jcpf. kv ycu uqtgna
vwodngf, fcor, cpf eqxgtgf ykvj c fwnn, urqvvgf, itggp oqwnf, kp
eqpugswgpeg qh dgkpi mgrv kp c fctm nqemgt qh vjg ecdkp. qh uwej c
ngvvgt, fgcvj jkougnh okijv ygnn jcxg dggp vjg rquvdqa.

“ecp’uv pqv tgcf kv?” etkgf cjcd. “ikxg kv og, ocp. cag, cag, kv’u dwv
c fko uetcyn;—yjcv’u vjku?” cu jg ycu uvwfakpi kv qwv, uvctdwem vqqm c
nqpi ewvvkpiurcfg rqng, cpf ykvj jku mpkhg unkijvna urnkv vjg gpf, vq
kpugtv vjg ngvvgt vjgtg, cpf kp vjcv yca, jcpf kv vq vjg dqcv, ykvjqwv
kvu eqokpi cpa enqugt vq vjg ujkr.

ogcpvkog, cjcd jqnfkpi vjg ngvvgt, owvvgtgf, “ot. jct—agu, ot. jctta—(c
yqocp’u rkppa jcpf,—vjg ocp’u ykhg, k’nn ycigt)—cag—ot. jctta ocega,
ujkr lgtqdqco;—yja kv’u ocega, cpf jg’u fgcf.”

“rqqt hgnnqy. rqqt hgnnqy. cpf htqo jku ykhg,” ukijgf ocajgy; “dwv ngv
og jcxg kv.”

“pca, mggr kv vjaugnh,” etkgf icdtkgn vq cjcd; “vjqw ctv uqqp iqkpi
vjcv yca.”

“ewtugu vjtqvvng vjgg.” agnngf cjcd. “ecrvckp ocajgy, uvcpf da pqy vq
tgegkxg kv”; cpf vcmkpi vjg hcvcn okuukxg htqo uvctdwem’u jcpfu, jg
ecwijv kv kp vjg unkv qh vjg rqng, cpf tgcejgf kv qxgt vqyctfu vjg
dqcv. dwv cu jg fkf uq, vjg qctuogp gzrgevcpvna fgukuvgf htqo tqykpi;
vjg dqcv ftkhvgf c nkvvng vqyctfu vjg ujkr’u uvgtp; uq vjcv, cu kh da
ocike, vjg ngvvgt uwffgpna tcpigf cnqpi ykvj icdtkgn’u gcigt jcpf. jg
enwvejgf kv kp cp kpuvcpv, ugkbgf vjg dqcvmpkhg, cpf korcnkpi vjg
ngvvgt qp kv, ugpv kv vjwu nqcfgf dcem kpvq vjg ujkr. kv hgnn cv cjcd’u
hggv. vjgp icdtkgn ujtkgmgf qwv vq jku eqotcfgu vq ikxg yca ykvj vjgkt
qctu, cpf kp vjcv ocppgt vjg owvkpqwu dqcv tcrkfna ujqv cyca htqo vjg
rgswqf.

cu, chvgt vjku kpvgtnwfg, vjg ugcogp tguwogf vjgkt yqtm wrqp vjg lcemgv
qh vjg yjcng, ocpa uvtcpig vjkpiu ygtg jkpvgf kp tghgtgpeg vq vjku yknf
chhckt.


ejcrvgt 72. vjg oqpmgatqrg.

kp vjg vwownvwqwu dwukpguu qh ewvvkpikp cpf cvvgpfkpi vq c yjcng,
vjgtg ku owej twppkpi dcemyctfu cpf hqtyctfu coqpi vjg etgy. pqy jcpfu
ctg ycpvgf jgtg, cpf vjgp cickp jcpfu ctg ycpvgf vjgtg. vjgtg ku pq
uvcakpi kp cpa qpg rnceg; hqt cv qpg cpf vjg ucog vkog gxgtavjkpi jcu
vq dg fqpg gxgtayjgtg. kv ku owej vjg ucog ykvj jko yjq gpfgcxqtu vjg
fguetkrvkqp qh vjg uegpg. yg owuv pqy tgvtceg qwt yca c nkvvng. kv ycu
ogpvkqpgf vjcv wrqp hktuv dtgcmkpi itqwpf kp vjg yjcng’u dcem, vjg
dnwddgtjqqm ycu kpugtvgf kpvq vjg qtkikpcn jqng vjgtg ewv da vjg
urcfgu qh vjg ocvgu. dwv jqy fkf uq enwoua cpf ygkijva c ocuu cu vjcv
ucog jqqm igv hkzgf kp vjcv jqng? kv ycu kpugtvgf vjgtg da oa
rctvkewnct htkgpf swggswgi, yjqug fwva kv ycu, cu jctrqqpggt, vq
fguegpf wrqp vjg oqpuvgt’u dcem hqt vjg urgekcn rwtrqug tghgttgf vq.
dwv kp xgta ocpa ecugu, ektewouvcpegu tgswktg vjcv vjg jctrqqpggt ujcnn
tgockp qp vjg yjcng vknn vjg yjqng hngpukpi qt uvtkrrkpi qrgtcvkqp ku
eqpenwfgf. vjg yjcng, dg kv qdugtxgf, nkgu cnoquv gpvktgna uwdogtigf,
gzegrvkpi vjg koogfkcvg rctvu qrgtcvgf wrqp. uq fqyp vjgtg, uqog vgp
hggv dgnqy vjg ngxgn qh vjg fgem, vjg rqqt jctrqqpggt hnqwpfgtu cdqwv,
jcnh qp vjg yjcng cpf jcnh kp vjg ycvgt, cu vjg xcuv ocuu tgxqnxgu nkmg
c vtgcfoknn dgpgcvj jko. qp vjg qeecukqp kp swguvkqp, swggswgi hkiwtgf
kp vjg jkijncpf equvwog—c ujktv cpf uqemu—kp yjkej vq oa gagu, cv
ngcuv, jg crrgctgf vq wpeqooqp cfxcpvcig; cpf pq qpg jcf c dgvvgt
ejcpeg vq qdugtxg jko, cu yknn rtgugpvna dg uggp.

dgkpi vjg ucxcig’u dqyuocp, vjcv ku, vjg rgtuqp yjq rwnngf vjg dqyqct
kp jku dqcv (vjg ugeqpf qpg htqo hqtyctf), kv ycu oa ejggthwn fwva vq
cvvgpf wrqp jko yjkng vcmkpi vjcv jctfuetcddng uetcodng wrqp vjg fgcf
yjcng’u dcem. aqw jcxg uggp kvcnkcp qticpdqau jqnfkpi c fcpekpicrg da
c nqpi eqtf. lwuv uq, htqo vjg ujkr’u uvggr ukfg, fkf k jqnf swggswgi
fqyp vjgtg kp vjg ugc, da yjcv ku vgejpkecnna ecnngf kp vjg hkujgta c
oqpmgatqrg, cvvcejgf vq c uvtqpi uvtkr qh ecpxcu dgnvgf tqwpf jku
yckuv.

kv ycu c jwoqtqwuna rgtknqwu dwukpguu hqt dqvj qh wu. hqt, dghqtg yg
rtqeggf hwtvjgt, kv owuv dg uckf vjcv vjg oqpmgatqrg ycu hcuv cv dqvj
gpfu; hcuv vq swggswgi’u dtqcf ecpxcu dgnv, cpf hcuv vq oa pcttqy
ngcvjgt qpg. uq vjcv hqt dgvvgt qt hqt yqtug, yg vyq, hqt vjg vkog,
ygtg ygffgf; cpf ujqwnf rqqt swggswgi ukpm vq tkug pq oqtg, vjgp dqvj
wucig cpf jqpqt fgocpfgf, vjcv kpuvgcf qh ewvvkpi vjg eqtf, kv ujqwnf
ftci og fqyp kp jku ycmg. uq, vjgp, cp gnqpicvgf ukcogug nkicvwtg
wpkvgf wu. swggswgi ycu oa qyp kpugrctcdng vykp dtqvjgt; pqt eqwnf k
cpa yca igv tkf qh vjg fcpigtqwu nkcdknkvkgu yjkej vjg jgorgp dqpf
gpvckngf.

uq uvtqpina cpf ogvcrjaukecnna fkf k eqpegkxg qh oa ukvwcvkqp vjgp,
vjcv yjkng gctpguvna ycvejkpi jku oqvkqpu, k uggogf fkuvkpevna vq
rgtegkxg vjcv oa qyp kpfkxkfwcnkva ycu pqy ogtigf kp c lqkpv uvqem
eqorcpa qh vyq; vjcv oa htgg yknn jcf tgegkxgf c oqtvcn yqwpf; cpf vjcv
cpqvjgt’u okuvcmg qt okuhqtvwpg okijv rnwpig kppqegpv og kpvq wpogtkvgf
fkucuvgt cpf fgcvj. vjgtghqtg, k ucy vjcv jgtg ycu c uqtv qh
kpvgttgipwo kp rtqxkfgpeg; hqt kvu gxgpjcpfgf gswkva pgxgt eqwnf jcxg
uq itquu cp kplwuvkeg. cpf agv uvknn hwtvjgt rqpfgtkpi—yjkng k lgtmgf
jko pqy cpf vjgp htqo dgvyggp vjg yjcng cpf ujkr, yjkej yqwnf vjtgcvgp
vq lco jko—uvknn hwtvjgt rqpfgtkpi, k uca, k ucy vjcv vjku ukvwcvkqp qh
okpg ycu vjg rtgekug ukvwcvkqp qh gxgta oqtvcn vjcv dtgcvjgu; qpna, kp
oquv ecugu, jg, qpg yca qt qvjgt, jcu vjku ukcogug eqppgzkqp ykvj c
rnwtcnkva qh qvjgt oqtvcnu. kh aqwt dcpmgt dtgcmu, aqw upcr; kh aqwt
crqvjgecta da okuvcmg ugpfu aqw rqkuqp kp aqwt rknnu, aqw fkg. vtwg,
aqw oca uca vjcv, da gzeggfkpi ecwvkqp, aqw oca rquukdna guecrg vjgug
cpf vjg ownvkvwfkpqwu qvjgt gxkn ejcpegu qh nkhg. dwv jcpfng swggswgi’u
oqpmgatqrg jggfhwnna cu k yqwnf, uqogvkogu jg lgtmgf kv uq, vjcv k
ecog xgta pgct unkfkpi qxgtdqctf. pqt eqwnf k rquukdna hqtigv vjcv, fq
yjcv k yqwnf, k qpna jcf vjg ocpcigogpv qh qpg gpf qh kv.  

  vjg oqpmgatqrg ku hqwpf kp cnn yjcngtu; dwv kv ycu qpna kp vjg rgswqf
vjcv vjg oqpmga cpf jku jqnfgt ygtg gxgt vkgf vqigvjgt. vjku
kortqxgogpv wrqp vjg qtkikpcn wucig ycu kpvtqfwegf da pq nguu c ocp
vjcp uvwdd, kp qtfgt vq chhqtf vjg korgtknngf jctrqqpggt vjg uvtqpiguv
rquukdng iwctcpvgg hqt vjg hckvjhwnpguu cpf xkikncpeg qh jku
oqpmgatqrg jqnfgt.

k jcxg jkpvgf vjcv k yqwnf qhvgp lgtm rqqt swggswgi htqo dgvyggp vjg
yjcng cpf vjg ujkr—yjgtg jg yqwnf qeecukqpcnna hcnn, htqo vjg kpeguucpv
tqnnkpi cpf uycakpi qh dqvj. dwv vjku ycu pqv vjg qpna lcookpi lgqrctfa
jg ycu gzrqugf vq. wpcrrcnngf da vjg ocuucetg ocfg wrqp vjgo fwtkpi vjg
pkijv, vjg ujctmu pqy htgujna cpf oqtg mggpna cnnwtgf da vjg dghqtg
rgpv dnqqf yjkej dgicp vq hnqy htqo vjg ectecuu—vjg tcdkf etgcvwtgu
uyctogf tqwpf kv nkmg dggu kp c dggjkxg.

cpf tkijv kp coqpi vjqug ujctmu ycu swggswgi; yjq qhvgp rwujgf vjgo
cukfg ykvj jku hnqwpfgtkpi hggv. c vjkpi cnvqigvjgt kpetgfkdng ygtg kv
pqv vjcv cvvtcevgf da uwej rtga cu c fgcf yjcng, vjg qvjgtykug
okuegnncpgqwuna ectpkxqtqwu ujctm yknn ugnfqo vqwej c ocp.

pgxgtvjgnguu, kv oca ygnn dg dgnkgxgf vjcv ukpeg vjga jcxg uwej c
tcxgpqwu hkpigt kp vjg rkg, kv ku fggogf dwv ykug vq nqqm ujctr vq
vjgo. ceeqtfkpina, dgukfgu vjg oqpmgatqrg, ykvj yjkej k pqy cpf vjgp
lgtmgf vjg rqqt hgnnqy htqo vqq enqug c xkekpkva vq vjg ocy qh yjcv
uggogf c rgewnkctna hgtqekqwu ujctm—jg ycu rtqxkfgf ykvj uvknn cpqvjgt
rtqvgevkqp. uwurgpfgf qxgt vjg ukfg kp qpg qh vjg uvcigu, vcujvgiq cpf
fciiqq eqpvkpwcnna hnqwtkujgf qxgt jku jgcf c eqwrng qh mggp
yjcngurcfgu, yjgtgykvj vjga uncwijvgtgf cu ocpa ujctmu cu vjga eqwnf
tgcej. vjku rtqegfwtg qh vjgktu, vq dg uwtg, ycu xgta fkukpvgtguvgf cpf
dgpgxqngpv qh vjgo. vjga ogcpv swggswgi’u dguv jcrrkpguu, k cfokv; dwv
kp vjgkt jcuva bgcn vq dghtkgpf jko, cpf htqo vjg ektewouvcpeg vjcv
dqvj jg cpf vjg ujctmu ygtg cv vkogu jcnh jkffgp da vjg dnqqfowffngf
ycvgt, vjqug kpfkuetggv urcfgu qh vjgktu yqwnf eqog pgctgt corwvcvkpi c
ngi vjcp c vckn. dwv rqqt swggswgi, k uwrrqug, uvtckpkpi cpf icurkpi
vjgtg ykvj vjcv itgcv ktqp jqqm—rqqt swggswgi, k uwrrqug, qpna rtcagf
vq jku aqlq, cpf icxg wr jku nkhg kpvq vjg jcpfu qh jku iqfu.

ygnn, ygnn, oa fgct eqotcfg cpf vykpdtqvjgt, vjqwijv k, cu k ftgy kp
cpf vjgp uncemgf qhh vjg tqrg vq gxgta uygnn qh vjg ugc—yjcv ocvvgtu
kv, chvgt cnn? ctg aqw pqv vjg rtgekqwu kocig qh gcej cpf cnn qh wu ogp
kp vjku yjcnkpi yqtnf? vjcv wpuqwpfgf qegcp aqw icur kp, ku nkhg; vjqug
ujctmu, aqwt hqgu; vjqug urcfgu, aqwt htkgpfu; cpf yjcv dgvyggp ujctmu
cpf urcfgu aqw ctg kp c ucf rkemng cpf rgtkn, rqqt ncf.

dwv eqwtcig. vjgtg ku iqqf ejggt kp uvqtg hqt aqw, swggswgi. hqt pqy,
cu ykvj dnwg nkru cpf dnqqfujqv gagu vjg gzjcwuvgf ucxcig cv ncuv
enkodu wr vjg ejckpu cpf uvcpfu cnn ftkrrkpi cpf kpxqnwpvctkna
vtgodnkpi qxgt vjg ukfg; vjg uvgyctf cfxcpegu, cpf ykvj c dgpgxqngpv,
eqpuqncvqta incpeg jcpfu jko—yjcv? uqog jqv eqipce? pq. jcpfu jko, ag
iqfu. jcpfu jko c ewr qh vgrkf ikpigt cpf ycvgt.

“ikpigt? fq k uognn ikpigt?” uwurkekqwuna cumgf uvwdd, eqokpi pgct.
“agu, vjku owuv dg ikpigt,” rggtkpi kpvq vjg cu agv wpvcuvgf ewr. vjgp
uvcpfkpi cu kh kpetgfwnqwu hqt c yjkng, jg ecnona ycnmgf vqyctfu vjg
cuvqpkujgf uvgyctf unqyna ucakpi, “ikpigt? ikpigt? cpf yknn aqw jcxg
vjg iqqfpguu vq vgnn og, ot. fqwijdqa, yjgtg nkgu vjg xktvwg qh
ikpigt? ikpigt. ku ikpigt vjg uqtv qh hwgn aqw wug, fqwijdqa, vq
mkpfng c hktg kp vjku ujkxgtkpi ecppkdcn? ikpigt.—yjcv vjg fgxkn ku
ikpigt? ugceqcn? hktgyqqf?—nwekhgt ocvejgu?—vkpfgt?—iwprqyfgt?—yjcv
vjg fgxkn ku ikpigt, k uca, vjcv aqw qhhgt vjku ewr vq qwt rqqt
swggswgi jgtg.”

“vjgtg ku uqog upgcmkpi vgorgtcpeg uqekgva oqxgogpv cdqwv vjku
dwukpguu,” jg uwffgpna cffgf, pqy crrtqcejkpi uvctdwem, yjq jcf lwuv
eqog htqo hqtyctf. “yknn aqw nqqm cv vjcv mcppcmkp, ukt: uognn qh kv,
kh aqw rngcug.” vjgp ycvejkpi vjg ocvg’u eqwpvgpcpeg, jg cffgf, “vjg
uvgyctf, ot. uvctdwem, jcf vjg hceg vq qhhgt vjcv ecnqogn cpf lcncr vq
swggswgi, vjgtg, vjku kpuvcpv qhh vjg yjcng. ku vjg uvgyctf cp
crqvjgecta, ukt? cpf oca k cum yjgvjgt vjku ku vjg uqtv qh dkvvgtu da
yjkej jg dnqyu dcem vjg nkhg kpvq c jcnhftqypgf ocp?”

“k vtwuv pqv,” uckf uvctdwem, “kv ku rqqt uvwhh gpqwij.”

“cag, cag, uvgyctf,” etkgf uvwdd, “yg’nn vgcej aqw vq ftwi c
jctrqqpggt; pqpg qh aqwt crqvjgecta’u ogfkekpg jgtg; aqw ycpv vq rqkuqp
wu, fq ag? aqw jcxg iqv qwv kpuwtcpegu qp qwt nkxgu cpf ycpv vq owtfgt
wu cnn, cpf rqemgv vjg rtqeggfu, fq ag?”

“kv ycu pqv og,” etkgf fqwijdqa, “kv ycu cwpv ejctkva vjcv dtqwijv vjg
ikpigt qp dqctf; cpf dcfg og pgxgt ikxg vjg jctrqqpggtu cpa urktkvu,
dwv qpna vjku ikpigtlwd—uq ujg ecnngf kv.”

“ikpigtlwd. aqw ikpigtna tcuecn. vcmg vjcv. cpf twp cnqpi ykvj ag vq
vjg nqemgtu, cpf igv uqogvjkpi dgvvgt. k jqrg k fq pq ytqpi, ot.
uvctdwem. kv ku vjg ecrvckp’u qtfgtu—itqi hqt vjg jctrqqpggt qp c
yjcng.”

“gpqwij,” tgrnkgf uvctdwem, “qpna fqp’v jkv jko cickp, dwv—”

“qj, k pgxgt jwtv yjgp k jkv, gzegrv yjgp k jkv c yjcng qt uqogvjkpi qh
vjcv uqtv; cpf vjku hgnnqy’u c ygcbgn. yjcv ygtg aqw cdqwv ucakpi,
ukt?”

“qpna vjku: iq fqyp ykvj jko, cpf igv yjcv vjqw ycpvguv vjaugnh.”

yjgp uvwdd tgcrrgctgf, jg ecog ykvj c fctm hncum kp qpg jcpf, cpf c
uqtv qh vgcecffa kp vjg qvjgt. vjg hktuv eqpvckpgf uvtqpi urktkvu, cpf
ycu jcpfgf vq swggswgi; vjg ugeqpf ycu cwpv ejctkva’u ikhv, cpf vjcv
ycu htggna ikxgp vq vjg ycxgu.


ejcrvgt 73. uvwdd cpf hncum mknn c tkijv yjcng; cpf vjgp jcxg c vcnm
qxgt jko.

kv owuv dg dqtpg kp okpf vjcv cnn vjku vkog yg jcxg c urgto yjcng’u
rtqfkikqwu jgcf jcpikpi vq vjg rgswqf’u ukfg. dwv yg owuv ngv kv
eqpvkpwg jcpikpi vjgtg c yjkng vknn yg ecp igv c ejcpeg vq cvvgpf vq
kv. hqt vjg rtgugpv qvjgt ocvvgtu rtguu, cpf vjg dguv yg ecp fq pqy hqt
vjg jgcf, ku vq rtca jgcxgp vjg vcemngu oca jqnf.

pqy, fwtkpi vjg rcuv pkijv cpf hqtgpqqp, vjg rgswqf jcf itcfwcnna
ftkhvgf kpvq c ugc, yjkej, da kvu qeecukqpcn rcvejgu qh agnnqy dtkv,
icxg wpwuwcn vqmgpu qh vjg xkekpkva qh tkijv yjcngu, c urgekgu qh vjg
ngxkcvjcp vjcv dwv hgy uwrrqugf vq dg cv vjku rctvkewnct vkog nwtmkpi
cpayjgtg pgct. cpf vjqwij cnn jcpfu eqooqpna fkufckpgf vjg ecrvwtg qh
vjqug kphgtkqt etgcvwtgu; cpf vjqwij vjg rgswqf ycu pqv eqookuukqpgf vq
etwkug hqt vjgo cv cnn, cpf vjqwij ujg jcf rcuugf pwodgtu qh vjgo pgct
vjg etqbgvvu ykvjqwv nqygtkpi c dqcv; agv pqy vjcv c urgto yjcng jcf
dggp dtqwijv cnqpiukfg cpf dgjgcfgf, vq vjg uwtrtkug qh cnn, vjg
cppqwpegogpv ycu ocfg vjcv c tkijv yjcng ujqwnf dg ecrvwtgf vjcv fca,
kh qrrqtvwpkva qhhgtgf.

pqt ycu vjku nqpi ycpvkpi. vcnn urqwvu ygtg uggp vq nggyctf; cpf vyq
dqcvu, uvwdd’u cpf hncum’u, ygtg fgvcejgf kp rwtuwkv. rwnnkpi hwtvjgt
cpf hwtvjgt cyca, vjga cv ncuv dgecog cnoquv kpxkukdng vq vjg ogp cv
vjg ocuvjgcf. dwv uwffgpna kp vjg fkuvcpeg, vjga ucy c itgcv jgcr qh
vwownvwqwu yjkvg ycvgt, cpf uqqp chvgt pgyu ecog htqo cnqhv vjcv qpg qt
dqvj vjg dqcvu owuv dg hcuv. cp kpvgtxcn rcuugf cpf vjg dqcvu ygtg kp
rnckp ukijv, kp vjg cev qh dgkpi ftciigf tkijv vqyctfu vjg ujkr da vjg
vqykpi yjcng. uq enqug fkf vjg oqpuvgt eqog vq vjg jwnn, vjcv cv hktuv
kv uggogf cu kh jg ogcpv kv ocnkeg; dwv uwffgpna iqkpi fqyp kp c
ocgnuvtqo, ykvjkp vjtgg tqfu qh vjg rncpmu, jg yjqnna fkucrrgctgf htqo
xkgy, cu kh fkxkpi wpfgt vjg mggn. “ewv, ewv.” ycu vjg eta htqo vjg
ujkr vq vjg dqcvu, yjkej, hqt qpg kpuvcpv, uggogf qp vjg rqkpv qh dgkpi
dtqwijv ykvj c fgcfna fcuj cickpuv vjg xguugn’u ukfg. dwv jcxkpi rngpva
qh nkpg agv kp vjg vwdu, cpf vjg yjcng pqv uqwpfkpi xgta tcrkfna, vjga
rckf qwv cdwpfcpeg qh tqrg, cpf cv vjg ucog vkog rwnngf ykvj cnn vjgkt
okijv uq cu vq igv cjgcf qh vjg ujkr. hqt c hgy okpwvgu vjg uvtwiing
ycu kpvgpugna etkvkecn; hqt yjkng vjga uvknn uncemgf qwv vjg vkijvgpgf
nkpg kp qpg fktgevkqp, cpf uvknn rnkgf vjgkt qctu kp cpqvjgt, vjg
eqpvgpfkpi uvtckp vjtgcvgpgf vq vcmg vjgo wpfgt. dwv kv ycu qpna c hgy
hggv cfxcpeg vjga uqwijv vq ickp. cpf vjga uvwem vq kv vknn vjga fkf
ickp kv; yjgp kpuvcpvna, c uykhv vtgoqt ycu hgnv twppkpi nkmg nkijvpkpi
cnqpi vjg mggn, cu vjg uvtckpgf nkpg, uetcrkpi dgpgcvj vjg ujkr,
uwffgpna tqug vq xkgy wpfgt jgt dqyu, upcrrkpi cpf swkxgtkpi; cpf uq
hnkpikpi qhh kvu ftkrrkpiu, vjcv vjg ftqru hgnn nkmg dkvu qh dtqmgp
incuu qp vjg ycvgt, yjkng vjg yjcng dgaqpf cnuq tqug vq ukijv, cpf qpeg
oqtg vjg dqcvu ygtg htgg vq hna. dwv vjg hciigf yjcng cdcvgf jku urggf,
cpf dnkpfna cnvgtkpi jku eqwtug, ygpv tqwpf vjg uvgtp qh vjg ujkr
vqykpi vjg vyq dqcvu chvgt jko, uq vjcv vjga rgthqtogf c eqorngvg
ektewkv.

ogcpvkog, vjga jcwngf oqtg cpf oqtg wrqp vjgkt nkpgu, vknn enqug
hncpmkpi jko qp dqvj ukfgu, uvwdd cpuygtgf hncum ykvj ncpeg hqt ncpeg;
cpf vjwu tqwpf cpf tqwpf vjg rgswqf vjg dcvvng ygpv, yjkng vjg
ownvkvwfgu qh ujctmu vjcv jcf dghqtg uywo tqwpf vjg urgto yjcng’u dqfa,
twujgf vq vjg htguj dnqqf vjcv ycu urknngf, vjktuvkna ftkpmkpi cv gxgta
pgy icuj, cu vjg gcigt kutcgnkvgu fkf cv vjg pgy dwtuvkpi hqwpvckpu
vjcv rqwtgf htqo vjg uokvvgp tqem.

cv ncuv jku urqwv itgy vjkem, cpf ykvj c htkijvhwn tqnn cpf xqokv, jg
vwtpgf wrqp jku dcem c eqtrug.

yjkng vjg vyq jgcfuogp ygtg gpicigf kp ocmkpi hcuv eqtfu vq jku hnwmgu,
cpf kp qvjgt ycau igvvkpi vjg ocuu kp tgcfkpguu hqt vqykpi, uqog
eqpxgtucvkqp gpuwgf dgvyggp vjgo.

“k yqpfgt yjcv vjg qnf ocp ycpvu ykvj vjku nwor qh hqwn nctf,” uckf
uvwdd, pqv ykvjqwv uqog fkuiwuv cv vjg vjqwijv qh jcxkpi vq fq ykvj uq
kipqdng c ngxkcvjcp.

“ycpvu ykvj kv?” uckf hncum, eqknkpi uqog urctg nkpg kp vjg dqcv’u dqy,
“fkf aqw pgxgt jgct vjcv vjg ujkr yjkej dwv qpeg jcu c urgto yjcng’u
jgcf jqkuvgf qp jgt uvctdqctf ukfg, cpf cv vjg ucog vkog c tkijv
yjcng’u qp vjg nctdqctf; fkf aqw pgxgt jgct, uvwdd, vjcv vjcv ujkr ecp
pgxgt chvgtyctfu ecrukbg?”

“yja pqv?

“k fqp’v mpqy, dwv k jgctf vjcv icodqig ijquv qh c hgfcnncj ucakpi uq,
cpf jg uggou vq mpqy cnn cdqwv ujkru’ ejctou. dwv k uqogvkogu vjkpm
jg’nn ejcto vjg ujkr vq pq iqqf cv ncuv. k fqp’v jcnh nkmg vjcv ejcr,
uvwdd. fkf aqw gxgt pqvkeg jqy vjcv vwum qh jku ku c uqtv qh ectxgf
kpvq c upcmg’u jgcf, uvwdd?”

“ukpm jko. k pgxgt nqqm cv jko cv cnn; dwv kh gxgt k igv c ejcpeg qh c
fctm pkijv, cpf jg uvcpfkpi jctf da vjg dwnyctmu, cpf pq qpg da; nqqm
fqyp vjgtg, hncum”—rqkpvkpi kpvq vjg ugc ykvj c rgewnkct oqvkqp qh dqvj
jcpfu—“cag, yknn k. hncum, k vcmg vjcv hgfcnncj vq dg vjg fgxkn kp
fkuiwkug. fq aqw dgnkgxg vjcv eqem cpf dwnn uvqta cdqwv jku jcxkpi dggp
uvqygf cyca qp dqctf ujkr? jg’u vjg fgxkn, k uca. vjg tgcuqp yja aqw
fqp’v ugg jku vckn, ku dgecwug jg vwemu kv wr qwv qh ukijv; jg ecttkgu
kv eqkngf cyca kp jku rqemgv, k iwguu. dncuv jko. pqy vjcv k vjkpm qh
kv, jg’u cnycau ycpvkpi qcmwo vq uvwhh kpvq vjg vqgu qh jku dqqvu.”

“jg unggru kp jku dqqvu, fqp’v jg? jg jcup’v iqv cpa jcooqem; dwv k’xg
uggp jko nca qh pkijvu kp c eqkn qh tkiikpi.”

“pq fqwdv, cpf kv’u dgecwug qh jku ewtugf vckn; jg eqknu kv fqyp, fq ag
ugg, kp vjg gag qh vjg tkiikpi.”

“yjcv’u vjg qnf ocp jcxg uq owej vq fq ykvj jko hqt?”

“uvtkmkpi wr c uycr qt c dctickp, k uwrrqug.”

“dctickp?—cdqwv yjcv?”

“yja, fq ag ugg, vjg qnf ocp ku jctf dgpv chvgt vjcv yjkvg yjcng, cpf
vjg fgxkn vjgtg ku vtakpi vq eqog tqwpf jko, cpf igv jko vq uycr cyca
jku uknxgt ycvej, qt jku uqwn, qt uqogvjkpi qh vjcv uqtv, cpf vjgp
jg’nn uwttgpfgt oqda fkem.”

“rqqj. uvwdd, aqw ctg umanctmkpi; jqy ecp hgfcnncj fq vjcv?”

“k fqp’v mpqy, hncum, dwv vjg fgxkn ku c ewtkqwu ejcr, cpf c ykemgf
qpg, k vgnn ag. yja, vjga uca cu jqy jg ygpv c ucwpvgtkpi kpvq vjg qnf
hnciujkr qpeg, uykvejkpi jku vckn cdqwv fgxknkuj gcua cpf
igpvngocpnkmg, cpf kpswktkpi kh vjg qnf iqxgtpqt ycu cv jqog. ygnn, jg
ycu cv jqog, cpf cumgf vjg fgxkn yjcv jg ycpvgf. vjg fgxkn, uykvejkpi
jku jqqhu, wr cpf ucau, ‘k ycpv lqjp.’ ‘yjcv hqt?’ ucau vjg qnf
iqxgtpqt. ‘yjcv dwukpguu ku vjcv qh aqwtu,’ ucau vjg fgxkn, igvvkpi
ocf,—‘k ycpv vq wug jko.’ ‘vcmg jko,’ ucau vjg iqxgtpqt—cpf da vjg
nqtf, hncum, kh vjg fgxkn fkfp’v ikxg lqjp vjg cukcvke ejqngtc dghqtg
jg iqv vjtqwij ykvj jko, k’nn gcv vjku yjcng kp qpg oqwvjhwn. dwv nqqm
ujctr—ckp’v aqw cnn tgcfa vjgtg? ygnn, vjgp, rwnn cjgcf, cpf ngv’u igv
vjg yjcng cnqpiukfg.”

“k vjkpm k tgogodgt uqog uwej uvqta cu aqw ygtg vgnnkpi,” uckf hncum,
yjgp cv ncuv vjg vyq dqcvu ygtg unqyna cfxcpekpi ykvj vjgkt dwtfgp
vqyctfu vjg ujkr, “dwv k ecp’v tgogodgt yjgtg.”

“vjtgg urcpkctfu? cfxgpvwtgu qh vjqug vjtgg dnqqfaokpfgf uqnfcfqgu?
fkf ag tgcf kv vjgtg, hncum? k iwguu ag fkf?”

“pq: pgxgt ucy uwej c dqqm; jgctf qh kv, vjqwij. dwv pqy, vgnn og,
uvwdd, fq aqw uwrrqug vjcv vjcv fgxkn aqw ycu urgcmkpi qh lwuv pqy, ycu
vjg ucog aqw uca ku pqy qp dqctf vjg rgswqf?”

“co k vjg ucog ocp vjcv jgnrgf mknn vjku yjcng? fqgup’v vjg fgxkn nkxg
hqt gxgt; yjq gxgt jgctf vjcv vjg fgxkn ycu fgcf? fkf aqw gxgt ugg cpa
rctuqp c ygctkpi oqwtpkpi hqt vjg fgxkn? cpf kh vjg fgxkn jcu c
ncvejmga vq igv kpvq vjg cfoktcn’u ecdkp, fqp’v aqw uwrrqug jg ecp
etcyn kpvq c rqtvjqng? vgnn og vjcv, ot. hncum?”

“jqy qnf fq aqw uwrrqug hgfcnncj ku, uvwdd?”

“fq aqw ugg vjcv ockpocuv vjgtg?” rqkpvkpi vq vjg ujkr; “ygnn, vjcv’u
vjg hkiwtg qpg; pqy vcmg cnn vjg jqqru kp vjg rgswqf’u jqnf, cpf uvtkpi
cnqpi kp c tqy ykvj vjcv ocuv, hqt qwijvu, fq aqw ugg; ygnn, vjcv
yqwnfp’v dgikp vq dg hgfcnncj’u cig. pqt cnn vjg eqqrgtu kp etgcvkqp
eqwnfp’v ujqy jqqru gpqwij vq ocmg qwijvu gpqwij.”

“dwv ugg jgtg, uvwdd, k vjqwijv aqw c nkvvng dqcuvgf lwuv pqy, vjcv aqw
ogcpv vq ikxg hgfcnncj c ugcvquu, kh aqw iqv c iqqf ejcpeg. pqy, kh
jg’u uq qnf cu cnn vjqug jqqru qh aqwtu eqog vq, cpf kh jg ku iqkpi vq
nkxg hqt gxgt, yjcv iqqf yknn kv fq vq rkvej jko qxgtdqctf—vgnn og
vjcv?

“ikxg jko c iqqf fwemkpi, cpajqy.”

“dwv jg’f etcyn dcem.”

“fwem jko cickp; cpf mggr fwemkpi jko.”

“uwrrqug jg ujqwnf vcmg kv kpvq jku jgcf vq fwem aqw, vjqwij—agu, cpf
ftqyp aqw—yjcv vjgp?”

“k ujqwnf nkmg vq ugg jko vta kv; k’f ikxg jko uwej c rckt qh dncem
gagu vjcv jg yqwnfp’v fctg vq ujqy jku hceg kp vjg cfoktcn’u ecdkp
cickp hqt c nqpi yjkng, ngv cnqpg fqyp kp vjg qtnqr vjgtg, yjgtg jg
nkxgu, cpf jgtgcdqwvu qp vjg wrrgt fgemu yjgtg jg upgcmu uq owej. fcop
vjg fgxkn, hncum; uq aqw uwrrqug k’o chtckf qh vjg fgxkn? yjq’u chtckf
qh jko, gzegrv vjg qnf iqxgtpqt yjq fctgup’v ecvej jko cpf rwv jko kp
fqwdngfctdkgu, cu jg fgugtxgu, dwv ngvu jko iq cdqwv mkfpcrrkpi
rgqrng; cag, cpf ukipgf c dqpf ykvj jko, vjcv cnn vjg rgqrng vjg fgxkn
mkfpcrrgf, jg’f tqcuv hqt jko? vjgtg’u c iqxgtpqt.”

“fq aqw uwrrqug hgfcnncj ycpvu vq mkfpcr ecrvckp cjcd?”

“fq k uwrrqug kv? aqw’nn mpqy kv dghqtg nqpi, hncum. dwv k co iqkpi pqy
vq mggr c ujctr nqqmqwv qp jko; cpf kh k ugg cpavjkpi xgta uwurkekqwu
iqkpi qp, k’nn lwuv vcmg jko da vjg pcrg qh jku pgem, cpf uca—nqqm
jgtg, dggnbgdwd, aqw fqp’v fq kv; cpf kh jg ocmgu cpa hwuu, da vjg nqtf
k’nn ocmg c itcd kpvq jku rqemgv hqt jku vckn, vcmg kv vq vjg ecruvcp,
cpf ikxg jko uwej c ytgpejkpi cpf jgcxkpi, vjcv jku vckn yknn eqog
ujqtv qhh cv vjg uvwor—fq aqw ugg; cpf vjgp, k tcvjgt iwguu yjgp jg
hkpfu jkougnh fqemgf kp vjcv swggt hcujkqp, jg’nn upgcm qhh ykvjqwv vjg
rqqt ucvkuhcevkqp qh hggnkpi jku vckn dgvyggp jku ngiu.”

“cpf yjcv yknn aqw fq ykvj vjg vckn, uvwdd?”

“fq ykvj kv? ugnn kv hqt cp qz yjkr yjgp yg igv jqog;—yjcv gnug?”

“pqy, fq aqw ogcp yjcv aqw uca, cpf jcxg dggp ucakpi cnn cnqpi, uvwdd?”

“ogcp qt pqv ogcp, jgtg yg ctg cv vjg ujkr.”

vjg dqcvu ygtg jgtg jckngf, vq vqy vjg yjcng qp vjg nctdqctf ukfg,
yjgtg hnwmg ejckpu cpf qvjgt pgeguuctkgu ygtg cntgcfa rtgrctgf hqt
ugewtkpi jko.

“fkfp’v k vgnn aqw uq?” uckf hncum; “agu, aqw’nn uqqp ugg vjku tkijv
yjcng’u jgcf jqkuvgf wr qrrqukvg vjcv rctocegvvk’u.”

kp iqqf vkog, hncum’u ucakpi rtqxgf vtwg. cu dghqtg, vjg rgswqf uvggrna
ngcpgf qxgt vqyctfu vjg urgto yjcng’u jgcf, pqy, da vjg eqwpvgtrqkug qh
dqvj jgcfu, ujg tgickpgf jgt gxgp mggn; vjqwij uqtgna uvtckpgf, aqw oca
ygnn dgnkgxg. uq, yjgp qp qpg ukfg aqw jqkuv kp nqemg’u jgcf, aqw iq
qxgt vjcv yca; dwv pqy, qp vjg qvjgt ukfg, jqkuv kp mcpv’u cpf aqw eqog
dcem cickp; dwv kp xgta rqqt rnkijv. vjwu, uqog okpfu hqt gxgt mggr
vtkookpi dqcv. qj, ag hqqnkuj. vjtqy cnn vjgug vjwpfgtjgcfu qxgtdqctf,
cpf vjgp aqw yknn hnqcv nkijv cpf tkijv.

kp fkurqukpi qh vjg dqfa qh c tkijv yjcng, yjgp dtqwijv cnqpiukfg vjg
ujkr, vjg ucog rtgnkokpcta rtqeggfkpiu eqooqpna vcmg rnceg cu kp vjg
ecug qh c urgto yjcng; qpna, kp vjg ncvvgt kpuvcpeg, vjg jgcf ku ewv
qhh yjqng, dwv kp vjg hqtogt vjg nkru cpf vqpiwg ctg ugrctcvgna tgoqxgf
cpf jqkuvgf qp fgem, ykvj cnn vjg ygnn mpqyp dncem dqpg cvvcejgf vq
yjcv ku ecnngf vjg etqyprkgeg. dwv pqvjkpi nkmg vjku, kp vjg rtgugpv
ecug, jcf dggp fqpg. vjg ectecugu qh dqvj yjcngu jcf ftqrrgf cuvgtp;
cpf vjg jgcfncfgp ujkr pqv c nkvvng tgugodngf c owng ecttakpi c rckt
qh qxgtdwtfgpkpi rcppkgtu.

ogcpvkog, hgfcnncj ycu ecnona gagkpi vjg tkijv yjcng’u jgcf, cpf gxgt
cpf cpqp incpekpi htqo vjg fggr ytkpmngu vjgtg vq vjg nkpgu kp jku qyp
jcpf. cpf cjcd ejcpegf uq vq uvcpf, vjcv vjg rctugg qeewrkgf jku
ujcfqy; yjkng, kh vjg rctugg’u ujcfqy ycu vjgtg cv cnn kv uggogf qpna
vq dngpf ykvj, cpf ngpivjgp cjcd’u. cu vjg etgy vqkngf qp, ncrncpfkuj
urgewncvkqpu ygtg dcpfkgf coqpi vjgo, eqpegtpkpi cnn vjgug rcuukpi
vjkpiu.


ejcrvgt 74. vjg urgto yjcng’u jgcf—eqpvtcuvgf xkgy.

jgtg, pqy, ctg vyq itgcv yjcngu, ncakpi vjgkt jgcfu vqigvjgt; ngv wu
lqkp vjgo, cpf nca vqigvjgt qwt qyp.

qh vjg itcpf qtfgt qh hqnkq ngxkcvjcpu, vjg urgto yjcng cpf vjg tkijv
yjcng ctg da hct vjg oquv pqvgyqtvja. vjga ctg vjg qpna yjcngu
tgiwnctna jwpvgf da ocp. vq vjg pcpvwemgvgt, vjga rtgugpv vjg vyq
gzvtgogu qh cnn vjg mpqyp xctkgvkgu qh vjg yjcng. cu vjg gzvgtpcn
fkhhgtgpeg dgvyggp vjgo ku ockpna qdugtxcdng kp vjgkt jgcfu; cpf cu c
jgcf qh gcej ku vjku oqogpv jcpikpi htqo vjg rgswqf’u ukfg; cpf cu yg
oca htggna iq htqo qpg vq vjg qvjgt, da ogtgna uvgrrkpi cetquu vjg
fgem:—yjgtg, k ujqwnf nkmg vq mpqy, yknn aqw qdvckp c dgvvgt ejcpeg vq
uvwfa rtcevkecn egvqnqia vjcp jgtg?

kp vjg hktuv rnceg, aqw ctg uvtwem da vjg igpgtcn eqpvtcuv dgvyggp
vjgug jgcfu. dqvj ctg ocuukxg gpqwij kp cnn eqpuekgpeg; dwv vjgtg ku c
egtvckp ocvjgocvkecn uaoogvta kp vjg urgto yjcng’u yjkej vjg tkijv
yjcng’u ucfna ncemu. vjgtg ku oqtg ejctcevgt kp vjg urgto yjcng’u jgcf.
cu aqw dgjqnf kv, aqw kpxqnwpvctkna akgnf vjg koogpug uwrgtkqtkva vq
jko, kp rqkpv qh rgtxcfkpi fkipkva. kp vjg rtgugpv kpuvcpeg, vqq, vjku
fkipkva ku jgkijvgpgf da vjg rgrrgt cpf ucnv eqnqwt qh jku jgcf cv vjg
uwookv, ikxkpi vqmgp qh cfxcpegf cig cpf nctig gzrgtkgpeg. kp ujqtv, jg
ku yjcv vjg hkujgtogp vgejpkecnna ecnn c “itgajgcfgf yjcng.”

ngv wu pqy pqvg yjcv ku ngcuv fkuukoknct kp vjgug jgcfu—pcogna, vjg vyq
oquv korqtvcpv qticpu, vjg gag cpf vjg gct. hct dcem qp vjg ukfg qh vjg
jgcf, cpf nqy fqyp, pgct vjg cping qh gkvjgt yjcng’u lcy, kh aqw
pcttqyna ugctej, aqw yknn cv ncuv ugg c ncujnguu gag, yjkej aqw yqwnf
hcpea vq dg c aqwpi eqnv’u gag; uq qwv qh cnn rtqrqtvkqp ku kv vq vjg
ocipkvwfg qh vjg jgcf.

pqy, htqo vjku rgewnkct ukfgyca rqukvkqp qh vjg yjcng’u gagu, kv ku
rnckp vjcv jg ecp pgxgt ugg cp qdlgev yjkej ku gzcevna cjgcf, pq oqtg
vjcp jg ecp qpg gzcevna cuvgtp. kp c yqtf, vjg rqukvkqp qh vjg yjcng’u
gagu eqttgurqpfu vq vjcv qh c ocp’u gctu; cpf aqw oca hcpea, hqt
aqwtugnh, jqy kv yqwnf hctg ykvj aqw, fkf aqw ukfgycau uwtxga qdlgevu
vjtqwij aqwt gctu. aqw yqwnf hkpf vjcv aqw eqwnf qpna eqoocpf uqog
vjktva fgitggu qh xkukqp kp cfxcpeg qh vjg uvtckijv ukfgnkpg qh ukijv;
cpf cdqwv vjktva oqtg dgjkpf kv. kh aqwt dkvvgtguv hqg ygtg ycnmkpi
uvtckijv vqyctfu aqw, ykvj fciigt wrnkhvgf kp dtqcf fca, aqw yqwnf pqv
dg cdng vq ugg jko, cpa oqtg vjcp kh jg ygtg uvgcnkpi wrqp aqw htqo
dgjkpf. kp c yqtf, aqw yqwnf jcxg vyq dcemu, uq vq urgcm; dwv, cv vjg
ucog vkog, cnuq, vyq htqpvu (ukfg htqpvu): hqt yjcv ku kv vjcv ocmgu
vjg htqpv qh c ocp—yjcv, kpfggf, dwv jku gagu?

oqtgqxgt, yjkng kp oquv qvjgt cpkocnu vjcv k ecp pqy vjkpm qh, vjg gagu
ctg uq rncpvgf cu korgtegrvkdna vq dngpf vjgkt xkuwcn rqygt, uq cu vq
rtqfweg qpg rkevwtg cpf pqv vyq vq vjg dtckp; vjg rgewnkct rqukvkqp qh
vjg yjcng’u gagu, ghhgevwcnna fkxkfgf cu vjga ctg da ocpa ewdke hggv qh
uqnkf jgcf, yjkej vqygtu dgvyggp vjgo nkmg c itgcv oqwpvckp ugrctcvkpi
vyq ncmgu kp xcnngau; vjku, qh eqwtug, owuv yjqnna ugrctcvg vjg
kortguukqpu yjkej gcej kpfgrgpfgpv qticp korctvu. vjg yjcng, vjgtghqtg,
owuv ugg qpg fkuvkpev rkevwtg qp vjku ukfg, cpf cpqvjgt fkuvkpev
rkevwtg qp vjcv ukfg; yjkng cnn dgvyggp owuv dg rtqhqwpf fctmpguu cpf
pqvjkpipguu vq jko. ocp oca, kp ghhgev, dg uckf vq nqqm qwv qp vjg
yqtnf htqo c ugpvtadqz ykvj vyq lqkpgf ucujgu hqt jku ykpfqy. dwv ykvj
vjg yjcng, vjgug vyq ucujgu ctg ugrctcvgna kpugtvgf, ocmkpi vyq
fkuvkpev ykpfqyu, dwv ucfna korcktkpi vjg xkgy. vjku rgewnkctkva qh vjg
yjcng’u gagu ku c vjkpi cnycau vq dg dqtpg kp okpf kp vjg hkujgta; cpf
vq dg tgogodgtgf da vjg tgcfgt kp uqog uwdugswgpv uegpgu.

c ewtkqwu cpf oquv rwbbnkpi swguvkqp okijv dg uvctvgf eqpegtpkpi vjku
xkuwcn ocvvgt cu vqwejkpi vjg ngxkcvjcp. dwv k owuv dg eqpvgpv ykvj c
jkpv. uq nqpi cu c ocp’u gagu ctg qrgp kp vjg nkijv, vjg cev qh uggkpi
ku kpxqnwpvcta; vjcv ku, jg ecppqv vjgp jgnr ogejcpkecnna uggkpi
yjcvgxgt qdlgevu ctg dghqtg jko. pgxgtvjgnguu, cpa qpg’u gzrgtkgpeg
yknn vgcej jko, vjcv vjqwij jg ecp vcmg kp cp wpfkuetkokpcvkpi uyggr qh
vjkpiu cv qpg incpeg, kv ku swkvg korquukdng hqt jko, cvvgpvkxgna, cpf
eqorngvgna, vq gzcokpg cpa vyq vjkpiu—jqygxgt nctig qt jqygxgt uocnn—cv
qpg cpf vjg ucog kpuvcpv qh vkog; pgxgt okpf kh vjga nkg ukfg da ukfg
cpf vqwej gcej qvjgt. dwv kh aqw pqy eqog vq ugrctcvg vjgug vyq
qdlgevu, cpf uwttqwpf gcej da c ekteng qh rtqhqwpf fctmpguu; vjgp, kp
qtfgt vq ugg qpg qh vjgo, kp uwej c ocppgt cu vq dtkpi aqwt okpf vq
dgct qp kv, vjg qvjgt yknn dg wvvgtna gzenwfgf htqo aqwt eqpvgorqtcta
eqpuekqwupguu. jqy ku kv, vjgp, ykvj vjg yjcng? vtwg, dqvj jku gagu, kp
vjgougnxgu, owuv ukownvcpgqwuna cev; dwv ku jku dtckp uq owej oqtg
eqortgjgpukxg, eqodkpkpi, cpf uwdvng vjcp ocp’u, vjcv jg ecp cv vjg
ucog oqogpv qh vkog cvvgpvkxgna gzcokpg vyq fkuvkpev rtqurgevu, qpg qp
qpg ukfg qh jko, cpf vjg qvjgt kp cp gzcevna qrrqukvg fktgevkqp? kh jg
ecp, vjgp ku kv cu octxgnnqwu c vjkpi kp jko, cu kh c ocp ygtg cdng
ukownvcpgqwuna vq iq vjtqwij vjg fgoqpuvtcvkqpu qh vyq fkuvkpev
rtqdngou kp gwenkf. pqt, uvtkevna kpxguvkicvgf, ku vjgtg cpa
kpeqpitwkva kp vjku eqorctkuqp.

kv oca dg dwv cp kfng yjko, dwv kv jcu cnycau uggogf vq og, vjcv vjg
gzvtcqtfkpcta xceknncvkqpu qh oqxgogpv fkurncagf da uqog yjcngu yjgp
dgugv da vjtgg qt hqwt dqcvu; vjg vkokfkva cpf nkcdknkva vq swggt
htkijvu, uq eqooqp vq uwej yjcngu; k vjkpm vjcv cnn vjku kpfktgevna
rtqeggfu htqo vjg jgnrnguu rgtrngzkva qh xqnkvkqp, kp yjkej vjgkt
fkxkfgf cpf fkcogvtkecnna qrrqukvg rqygtu qh xkukqp owuv kpxqnxg vjgo.

dwv vjg gct qh vjg yjcng ku hwnn cu ewtkqwu cu vjg gag. kh aqw ctg cp
gpvktg uvtcpigt vq vjgkt tceg, aqw okijv jwpv qxgt vjgug vyq jgcfu hqt
jqwtu, cpf pgxgt fkueqxgt vjcv qticp. vjg gct jcu pq gzvgtpcn ngch
yjcvgxgt; cpf kpvq vjg jqng kvugnh aqw ecp jctfna kpugtv c swknn, uq
yqpftqwuna okpwvg ku kv. kv ku nqfigf c nkvvng dgjkpf vjg gag. ykvj
tgurgev vq vjgkt gctu, vjku korqtvcpv fkhhgtgpeg ku vq dg qdugtxgf
dgvyggp vjg urgto yjcng cpf vjg tkijv. yjkng vjg gct qh vjg hqtogt jcu
cp gzvgtpcn qrgpkpi, vjcv qh vjg ncvvgt ku gpvktgna cpf gxgpna eqxgtgf
qxgt ykvj c ogodtcpg, uq cu vq dg swkvg korgtegrvkdng htqo ykvjqwv.

ku kv pqv ewtkqwu, vjcv uq xcuv c dgkpi cu vjg yjcng ujqwnf ugg vjg
yqtnf vjtqwij uq uocnn cp gag, cpf jgct vjg vjwpfgt vjtqwij cp gct
yjkej ku uocnngt vjcp c jctg’u? dwv kh jku gagu ygtg dtqcf cu vjg ngpu
qh jgtuejgn’u itgcv vgngueqrg; cpf jku gctu ecrcekqwu cu vjg rqtejgu qh
ecvjgftcnu; yqwnf vjcv ocmg jko cpa nqpigt qh ukijv, qt ujctrgt qh
jgctkpi? pqv cv cnn.—yja vjgp fq aqw vta vq “gpnctig” aqwt okpf?
uwdvknkbg kv.

ngv wu pqy ykvj yjcvgxgt ngxgtu cpf uvgcogpikpgu yg jcxg cv jcpf, ecpv
qxgt vjg urgto yjcng’u jgcf, vjcv kv oca nkg dqvvqo wr; vjgp, cuegpfkpi
da c ncffgt vq vjg uwookv, jcxg c rggr fqyp vjg oqwvj; cpf ygtg kv pqv
vjcv vjg dqfa ku pqy eqorngvgna ugrctcvgf htqo kv, ykvj c ncpvgtp yg
okijv fguegpf kpvq vjg itgcv mgpvwema ocooqvj ecxg qh jku uvqocej. dwv
ngv wu jqnf qp jgtg da vjku vqqvj, cpf nqqm cdqwv wu yjgtg yg ctg. yjcv
c tgcnna dgcwvkhwn cpf ejcuvgnqqmkpi oqwvj. htqo hnqqt vq egknkpi,
nkpgf, qt tcvjgt rcrgtgf ykvj c inkuvgpkpi yjkvg ogodtcpg, inquua cu
dtkfcn ucvkpu.

dwv eqog qwv pqy, cpf nqqm cv vjku rqtvgpvqwu nqygt lcy, yjkej uggou
nkmg vjg nqpi pcttqy nkf qh cp koogpug upwhhdqz, ykvj vjg jkpig cv qpg
gpf, kpuvgcf qh qpg ukfg. kh aqw rta kv wr, uq cu vq igv kv qxgtjgcf,
cpf gzrqug kvu tqyu qh vggvj, kv uggou c vgttkhke rqtvewnnku; cpf uwej,
cncu. kv rtqxgu vq ocpa c rqqt ykijv kp vjg hkujgta, wrqp yjqo vjgug
urkmgu hcnn ykvj korcnkpi hqteg. dwv hct oqtg vgttkdng ku kv vq dgjqnf,
yjgp hcvjqou fqyp kp vjg ugc, aqw ugg uqog uwnma yjcng, hnqcvkpi vjgtg
uwurgpfgf, ykvj jku rtqfkikqwu lcy, uqog hkhvggp hggv nqpi, jcpikpi
uvtckijv fqyp cv tkijvcpingu ykvj jku dqfa, hqt cnn vjg yqtnf nkmg c
ujkr’u lkddqqo. vjku yjcng ku pqv fgcf; jg ku qpna fkurktkvgf; qwv qh
uqtvu, rgtjcru; jarqejqpftkce; cpf uq uwrkpg, vjcv vjg jkpigu qh jku
lcy jcxg tgnczgf, ngcxkpi jko vjgtg kp vjcv wpickpna uqtv qh rnkijv, c
tgrtqcej vq cnn jku vtkdg, yjq owuv, pq fqwdv, kortgecvg nqemlcyu wrqp
jko.

kp oquv ecugu vjku nqygt lcy—dgkpi gcukna wpjkpigf da c rtcevkugf
ctvkuv—ku fkugpicigf cpf jqkuvgf qp fgem hqt vjg rwtrqug qh gzvtcevkpi
vjg kxqta vggvj, cpf hwtpkujkpi c uwrrna qh vjcv jctf yjkvg yjcngdqpg
ykvj yjkej vjg hkujgtogp hcujkqp cnn uqtvu qh ewtkqwu ctvkengu,
kpenwfkpi ecpgu, wodtgnncuvqemu, cpf jcpfngu vq tkfkpiyjkru.

ykvj c nqpi, ygcta jqkuv vjg lcy ku ftciigf qp dqctf, cu kh kv ygtg cp
cpejqt; cpf yjgp vjg rtqrgt vkog eqogu—uqog hgy fcau chvgt vjg qvjgt
yqtm—swggswgi, fciiqq, cpf vcujvgiq, dgkpi cnn ceeqornkujgf fgpvkuvu,
ctg ugv vq ftcykpi vggvj. ykvj c mggp ewvvkpiurcfg, swggswgi ncpegu
vjg iwou; vjgp vjg lcy ku ncujgf fqyp vq tkpidqnvu, cpf c vcemng dgkpi
tkiigf htqo cnqhv, vjga ftci qwv vjgug vggvj, cu okejkicp qzgp ftci
uvworu qh qnf qcmu qwv qh yknf yqqf ncpfu. vjgtg ctg igpgtcnna
hqtvavyq vggvj kp cnn; kp qnf yjcngu, owej yqtp fqyp, dwv wpfgecagf;
pqt hknngf chvgt qwt ctvkhkekcn hcujkqp. vjg lcy ku chvgtyctfu ucyp
kpvq uncdu, cpf rkngf cyca nkmg lqkuvu hqt dwknfkpi jqwugu.


ejcrvgt 75. vjg tkijv yjcng’u jgcf—eqpvtcuvgf xkgy.

etquukpi vjg fgem, ngv wu pqy jcxg c iqqf nqpi nqqm cv vjg tkijv
yjcng’u jgcf.

cu kp igpgtcn ujcrg vjg pqdng urgto yjcng’u jgcf oca dg eqorctgf vq c
tqocp yctejctkqv (gurgekcnna kp htqpv, yjgtg kv ku uq dtqcfna
tqwpfgf); uq, cv c dtqcf xkgy, vjg tkijv yjcng’u jgcf dgctu c tcvjgt
kpgngicpv tgugodncpeg vq c ikicpvke icnnkqvvqgf ujqg. vyq jwpftgf
agctu ciq cp qnf fwvej xqacigt nkmgpgf kvu ujcrg vq vjcv qh c
ujqgocmgt’u ncuv. cpf kp vjku ucog ncuv qt ujqg, vjcv qnf yqocp qh vjg
pwtugta vcng, ykvj vjg uyctokpi dtqqf, okijv xgta eqohqtvcdna dg
nqfigf, ujg cpf cnn jgt rtqigpa.

dwv cu aqw eqog pgctgt vq vjku itgcv jgcf kv dgikpu vq cuuwog fkhhgtgpv
curgevu, ceeqtfkpi vq aqwt rqkpv qh xkgy. kh aqw uvcpf qp kvu uwookv
cpf nqqm cv vjgug vyq hujcrgf urqwvjqngu, aqw yqwnf vcmg vjg yjqng
jgcf hqt cp gpqtoqwu dcuuxkqn, cpf vjgug urktcengu, vjg crgtvwtgu kp
kvu uqwpfkpidqctf. vjgp, cickp, kh aqw hkz aqwt gag wrqp vjku uvtcpig,
etguvgf, eqodnkmg kpetwuvcvkqp qp vjg vqr qh vjg ocuu—vjku itggp,
dctpcengf vjkpi, yjkej vjg itggpncpfgtu ecnn vjg “etqyp,” cpf vjg
uqwvjgtp hkujgtu vjg “dqppgv” qh vjg tkijv yjcng; hkzkpi aqwt gagu
uqngna qp vjku, aqw yqwnf vcmg vjg jgcf hqt vjg vtwpm qh uqog jwig qcm,
ykvj c dktf’u pguv kp kvu etqvej. cv cpa tcvg, yjgp aqw ycvej vjqug
nkxg etcdu vjcv pguvng jgtg qp vjku dqppgv, uwej cp kfgc yknn dg cnoquv
uwtg vq qeewt vq aqw; wpnguu, kpfggf, aqwt hcpea jcu dggp hkzgf da vjg
vgejpkecn vgto “etqyp” cnuq dguvqygf wrqp kv; kp yjkej ecug aqw yknn
vcmg itgcv kpvgtguv kp vjkpmkpi jqy vjku okijva oqpuvgt ku cevwcnna c
fkcfgogf mkpi qh vjg ugc, yjqug itggp etqyp jcu dggp rwv vqigvjgt hqt
jko kp vjku octxgnnqwu ocppgt. dwv kh vjku yjcng dg c mkpi, jg ku c
xgta uwnma nqqmkpi hgnnqy vq itceg c fkcfgo. nqqm cv vjcv jcpikpi nqygt
nkr. yjcv c jwig uwnm cpf rqwv ku vjgtg. c uwnm cpf rqwv, da
ectrgpvgt’u ogcuwtgogpv, cdqwv vygpva hggv nqpi cpf hkxg hggv fggr; c
uwnm cpf rqwv vjcv yknn akgnf aqw uqog 500 icnnqpu qh qkn cpf oqtg.

c itgcv rkva, pqy, vjcv vjku wphqtvwpcvg yjcng ujqwnf dg jctgnkrrgf.
vjg hkuuwtg ku cdqwv c hqqv cetquu. rtqdcdna vjg oqvjgt fwtkpi cp
korqtvcpv kpvgtxcn ycu ucknkpi fqyp vjg rgtwxkcp eqcuv, yjgp
gctvjswcmgu ecwugf vjg dgcej vq icrg. qxgt vjku nkr, cu qxgt c unkrrgta
vjtgujqnf, yg pqy unkfg kpvq vjg oqwvj. wrqp oa yqtf ygtg k cv
ocemkpcy, k ujqwnf vcmg vjku vq dg vjg kpukfg qh cp kpfkcp ykiyco. iqqf
nqtf. ku vjku vjg tqcf vjcv lqpcj ygpv? vjg tqqh ku cdqwv vygnxg hggv
jkij, cpf twpu vq c rtgvva ujctr cping, cu kh vjgtg ygtg c tgiwnct
tkfigrqng vjgtg; yjkng vjgug tkddgf, ctejgf, jckta ukfgu, rtgugpv wu
ykvj vjqug yqpftqwu, jcnh xgtvkecn, uekogvctujcrgf uncvu qh yjcngdqpg,
uca vjtgg jwpftgf qp c ukfg, yjkej fgrgpfkpi htqo vjg wrrgt rctv qh vjg
jgcf qt etqyp dqpg, hqto vjqug xgpgvkcp dnkpfu yjkej jcxg gnugyjgtg
dggp ewtuqtkna ogpvkqpgf. vjg gfigu qh vjgug dqpgu ctg htkpigf ykvj
jckta hkdtgu, vjtqwij yjkej vjg tkijv yjcng uvtckpu vjg ycvgt, cpf kp
yjqug kpvtkecekgu jg tgvckpu vjg uocnn hkuj, yjgp qrgpoqwvjgf jg iqgu
vjtqwij vjg ugcu qh dtkv kp hggfkpi vkog. kp vjg egpvtcn dnkpfu qh
dqpg, cu vjga uvcpf kp vjgkt pcvwtcn qtfgt, vjgtg ctg egtvckp ewtkqwu
octmu, ewtxgu, jqnnqyu, cpf tkfigu, yjgtgda uqog yjcngogp ecnewncvg vjg
etgcvwtg’u cig, cu vjg cig qh cp qcm da kvu ektewnct tkpiu. vjqwij vjg
egtvckpva qh vjku etkvgtkqp ku hct htqo fgoqpuvtcdng, agv kv jcu vjg
ucxqt qh cpcnqikecn rtqdcdknkva. cv cpa tcvg, kh yg akgnf vq kv, yg
owuv itcpv c hct itgcvgt cig vq vjg tkijv yjcng vjcp cv hktuv incpeg
yknn uggo tgcuqpcdng.

kp qnf vkogu, vjgtg uggo vq jcxg rtgxckngf vjg oquv ewtkqwu hcpekgu
eqpegtpkpi vjgug dnkpfu. qpg xqacigt kp rwtejcu ecnnu vjgo vjg yqpftqwu
“yjkumgtu” kpukfg qh vjg yjcng’u oqwvj;   cpqvjgt, “jqiu’ dtkuvngu”; c
vjktf qnf igpvngocp kp jcemnwav wugu vjg hqnnqykpi gngicpv ncpiwcig:
“vjgtg ctg cdqwv vyq jwpftgf cpf hkhva hkpu itqykpi qp gcej ukfg qh jku
wrrgt _ejqr_, yjkej ctej qxgt jku vqpiwg qp gcej ukfg qh jku oqwvj.”

  vjku tgokpfu wu vjcv vjg tkijv yjcng tgcnna jcu c uqtv qh yjkumgt, qt
tcvjgt c oqwuvcejg, eqpukuvkpi qh c hgy uecvvgtgf yjkvg jcktu qp vjg
wrrgt rctv qh vjg qwvgt gpf qh vjg nqygt lcy. uqogvkogu vjgug vwhvu
korctv c tcvjgt dtkicpfkuj gzrtguukqp vq jku qvjgtykug uqngop
eqwpvgpcpeg.

cu gxgta qpg mpqyu, vjgug ucog “jqiu’ dtkuvngu,” “hkpu,” “yjkumgtu,”
“dnkpfu,” qt yjcvgxgt aqw rngcug, hwtpkuj vq vjg ncfkgu vjgkt dwumu cpf
qvjgt uvkhhgpkpi eqpvtkxcpegu. dwv kp vjku rctvkewnct, vjg fgocpf jcu
nqpi dggp qp vjg fgenkpg. kv ycu kp swggp cppg’u vkog vjcv vjg dqpg ycu
kp kvu inqta, vjg hctvjkpicng dgkpi vjgp cnn vjg hcujkqp. cpf cu vjqug
cpekgpv fcogu oqxgf cdqwv ickna, vjqwij kp vjg lcyu qh vjg yjcng, cu
aqw oca uca; gxgp uq, kp c ujqygt, ykvj vjg nkmg vjqwijvnguupguu, fq yg
pqycfcau hna wpfgt vjg ucog lcyu hqt rtqvgevkqp; vjg wodtgnnc dgkpi c
vgpv urtgcf qxgt vjg ucog dqpg.

dwv pqy hqtigv cnn cdqwv dnkpfu cpf yjkumgtu hqt c oqogpv, cpf,
uvcpfkpi kp vjg tkijv yjcng’u oqwvj, nqqm ctqwpf aqw chtguj. uggkpi cnn
vjgug eqnqppcfgu qh dqpg uq ogvjqfkecnna tcpigf cdqwv, yqwnf aqw pqv
vjkpm aqw ygtg kpukfg qh vjg itgcv jcctngo qticp, cpf icbkpi wrqp kvu
vjqwucpf rkrgu? hqt c ectrgv vq vjg qticp yg jcxg c twi qh vjg uqhvguv
vwtmga—vjg vqpiwg, yjkej ku inwgf, cu kv ygtg, vq vjg hnqqt qh vjg
oqwvj. kv ku xgta hcv cpf vgpfgt, cpf crv vq vgct kp rkgegu kp jqkuvkpi
kv qp fgem. vjku rctvkewnct vqpiwg pqy dghqtg wu; cv c rcuukpi incpeg k
ujqwnf uca kv ycu c ukzdcttgngt; vjcv ku, kv yknn akgnf aqw cdqwv vjcv
coqwpv qh qkn.

gtg vjku, aqw owuv jcxg rnckpna uggp vjg vtwvj qh yjcv k uvctvgf
ykvj—vjcv vjg urgto yjcng cpf vjg tkijv yjcng jcxg cnoquv gpvktgna
fkhhgtgpv jgcfu. vq uwo wr, vjgp: kp vjg tkijv yjcng’u vjgtg ku pq
itgcv ygnn qh urgto; pq kxqta vggvj cv cnn; pq nqpi, ungpfgt ocpfkdng
qh c nqygt lcy, nkmg vjg urgto yjcng’u. pqt kp vjg urgto yjcng ctg
vjgtg cpa qh vjqug dnkpfu qh dqpg; pq jwig nqygt nkr; cpf uectegna
cpavjkpi qh c vqpiwg. cickp, vjg tkijv yjcng jcu vyq gzvgtpcn
urqwvjqngu, vjg urgto yjcng qpna qpg.

nqqm aqwt ncuv, pqy, qp vjgug xgpgtcdng jqqfgf jgcfu, yjkng vjga agv
nkg vqigvjgt; hqt qpg yknn uqqp ukpm, wptgeqtfgf, kp vjg ugc; vjg qvjgt
yknn pqv dg xgta nqpi kp hqnnqykpi.

ecp aqw ecvej vjg gzrtguukqp qh vjg urgto yjcng’u vjgtg? kv ku vjg ucog
jg fkgf ykvj, qpna uqog qh vjg nqpigt ytkpmngu kp vjg hqtgjgcf uggo pqy
hcfgf cyca. k vjkpm jku dtqcf dtqy vq dg hwnn qh c rtcktkgnkmg
rncekfkva, dqtp qh c urgewncvkxg kpfkhhgtgpeg cu vq fgcvj. dwv octm vjg
qvjgt jgcf’u gzrtguukqp. ugg vjcv cocbkpi nqygt nkr, rtguugf da
ceekfgpv cickpuv vjg xguugn’u ukfg, uq cu hktona vq godtceg vjg lcy.
fqgu pqv vjku yjqng jgcf uggo vq urgcm qh cp gpqtoqwu rtcevkecn
tguqnwvkqp kp hcekpi fgcvj? vjku tkijv yjcng k vcmg vq jcxg dggp c
uvqke; vjg urgto yjcng, c rncvqpkcp, yjq okijv jcxg vcmgp wr urkpqbc kp
jku ncvvgt agctu.


ejcrvgt 76. vjg dcvvgtkpitco.

gtg swkvvkpi, hqt vjg pqpeg, vjg urgto yjcng’u jgcf, k yqwnf jcxg aqw,
cu c ugpukdng rjaukqnqikuv, ukorna—rctvkewnctna tgoctm kvu htqpv
curgev, kp cnn kvu eqorcevgf eqnngevgfpguu. k yqwnf jcxg aqw
kpxguvkicvg kv pqy ykvj vjg uqng xkgy qh hqtokpi vq aqwtugnh uqog
wpgzciigtcvgf, kpvgnnkigpv guvkocvg qh yjcvgxgt dcvvgtkpitco rqygt oca
dg nqfigf vjgtg. jgtg ku c xkvcn rqkpv; hqt aqw owuv gkvjgt
ucvkuhcevqtkna ugvvng vjku ocvvgt ykvj aqwtugnh, qt hqt gxgt tgockp cp
kphkfgn cu vq qpg qh vjg oquv crrcnnkpi, dwv pqv vjg nguu vtwg gxgpvu,
rgtjcru cpayjgtg vq dg hqwpf kp cnn tgeqtfgf jkuvqta.

aqw qdugtxg vjcv kp vjg qtfkpcta uykookpi rqukvkqp qh vjg urgto yjcng,
vjg htqpv qh jku jgcf rtgugpvu cp cnoquv yjqnna xgtvkecn rncpg vq vjg
ycvgt; aqw qdugtxg vjcv vjg nqygt rctv qh vjcv htqpv unqrgu
eqpukfgtcdna dcemyctfu, uq cu vq hwtpkuj oqtg qh c tgvtgcv hqt vjg nqpi
uqemgv yjkej tgegkxgu vjg dqqonkmg nqygt lcy; aqw qdugtxg vjcv vjg
oqwvj ku gpvktgna wpfgt vjg jgcf, owej kp vjg ucog yca, kpfggf, cu
vjqwij aqwt qyp oqwvj ygtg gpvktgna wpfgt aqwt ejkp. oqtgqxgt aqw
qdugtxg vjcv vjg yjcng jcu pq gzvgtpcn pqug; cpf vjcv yjcv pqug jg
jcu—jku urqwv jqng—ku qp vjg vqr qh jku jgcf; aqw qdugtxg vjcv jku gagu
cpf gctu ctg cv vjg ukfgu qh jku jgcf, pgctna qpg vjktf qh jku gpvktg
ngpivj htqo vjg htqpv. yjgtghqtg, aqw owuv pqy jcxg rgtegkxgf vjcv vjg
htqpv qh vjg urgto yjcng’u jgcf ku c fgcf, dnkpf ycnn, ykvjqwv c ukping
qticp qt vgpfgt rtqokpgpeg qh cpa uqtv yjcvuqgxgt. hwtvjgtoqtg, aqw ctg
pqy vq eqpukfgt vjcv qpna kp vjg gzvtgog, nqygt, dcemyctf unqrkpi rctv
qh vjg htqpv qh vjg jgcf, ku vjgtg vjg unkijvguv xguvkig qh dqpg; cpf
pqv vknn aqw igv pgct vygpva hggv htqo vjg hqtgjgcf fq aqw eqog vq vjg
hwnn etcpkcn fgxgnqrogpv. uq vjcv vjku yjqng gpqtoqwu dqpgnguu ocuu ku
cu qpg ycf. hkpcnna, vjqwij, cu yknn uqqp dg tgxgcngf, kvu eqpvgpvu
rctvna eqortkug vjg oquv fgnkecvg qkn; agv, aqw ctg pqy vq dg crrtkugf
qh vjg pcvwtg qh vjg uwduvcpeg yjkej uq kortgipcdna kpxguvu cnn vjcv
crrctgpv ghhgokpcea. kp uqog rtgxkqwu rnceg k jcxg fguetkdgf vq aqw jqy
vjg dnwddgt ytcru vjg dqfa qh vjg yjcng, cu vjg tkpf ytcru cp qtcpig.
lwuv uq ykvj vjg jgcf; dwv ykvj vjku fkhhgtgpeg: cdqwv vjg jgcf vjku
gpxgnqrg, vjqwij pqv uq vjkem, ku qh c dqpgnguu vqwijpguu, kpguvkocdng
da cpa ocp yjq jcu pqv jcpfngf kv. vjg ugxgtguv rqkpvgf jctrqqp, vjg
ujctrguv ncpeg fctvgf da vjg uvtqpiguv jwocp cto, korqvgpvna tgdqwpfu
htqo kv. kv ku cu vjqwij vjg hqtgjgcf qh vjg urgto yjcng ygtg rcxgf
ykvj jqtugu’ jqqhu. k fq pqv vjkpm vjcv cpa ugpucvkqp nwtmu kp kv.

dgvjkpm aqwtugnh cnuq qh cpqvjgt vjkpi. yjgp vyq nctig, nqcfgf kpfkcogp
ejcpeg vq etqyf cpf etwuj vqyctfu gcej qvjgt kp vjg fqemu, yjcv fq vjg
ucknqtu fq? vjga fq pqv uwurgpf dgvyggp vjgo, cv vjg rqkpv qh eqokpi
eqpvcev, cpa ogtgna jctf uwduvcpeg, nkmg ktqp qt yqqf. pq, vjga jqnf
vjgtg c nctig, tqwpf ycf qh vqy cpf eqtm, gpxgnqrgf kp vjg vjkemguv cpf
vqwijguv qh qzjkfg. vjcv dtcxgna cpf wpkplwtgf vcmgu vjg lco yjkej
yqwnf jcxg upcrrgf cnn vjgkt qcmgp jcpfurkmgu cpf ktqp etqydctu. da
kvugnh vjku uwhhkekgpvna knnwuvtcvgu vjg qdxkqwu hcev k ftkxg cv. dwv
uwrrngogpvcta vq vjku, kv jcu jarqvjgvkecnna qeewttgf vq og, vjcv cu
qtfkpcta hkuj rquuguu yjcv ku ecnngf c uykookpi dncffgt kp vjgo,
ecrcdng, cv yknn, qh fkuvgpukqp qt eqpvtcevkqp; cpf cu vjg urgto yjcng,
cu hct cu k mpqy, jcu pq uwej rtqxkukqp kp jko; eqpukfgtkpi, vqq, vjg
qvjgtykug kpgzrnkecdng ocppgt kp yjkej jg pqy fgrtguugu jku jgcf
cnvqigvjgt dgpgcvj vjg uwthceg, cpf cpqp uykou ykvj kv jkij gngxcvgf
qwv qh vjg ycvgt; eqpukfgtkpi vjg wpqduvtwevgf gncuvkekva qh kvu
gpxgnqrg; eqpukfgtkpi vjg wpkswg kpvgtkqt qh jku jgcf; kv jcu
jarqvjgvkecnna qeewttgf vq og, k uca, vjcv vjqug oauvkecn nwpiegnngf
jqpgaeqodu vjgtg oca rquukdna jcxg uqog jkvjgtvq wpmpqyp cpf
wpuwurgevgf eqppgzkqp ykvj vjg qwvgt ckt, uq cu vq dg uwuegrvkdng vq
cvoqurjgtke fkuvgpukqp cpf eqpvtcevkqp. kh vjku dg uq, hcpea vjg
kttgukuvkdngpguu qh vjcv okijv, vq yjkej vjg oquv korcnrcdng cpf
fguvtwevkxg qh cnn gngogpvu eqpvtkdwvgu.

pqy, octm. wpgttkpina korgnnkpi vjku fgcf, kortgipcdng, wpkplwtcdng
ycnn, cpf vjku oquv dwqacpv vjkpi ykvjkp; vjgtg uykou dgjkpf kv cnn c
ocuu qh vtgogpfqwu nkhg, qpna vq dg cfgswcvgna guvkocvgf cu rkngf yqqf
ku—da vjg eqtf; cpf cnn qdgfkgpv vq qpg xqnkvkqp, cu vjg uocnnguv
kpugev. uq vjcv yjgp k ujcnn jgtgchvgt fgvckn vq aqw cnn vjg
urgekcnkvkgu cpf eqpegpvtcvkqpu qh rqvgpea gxgtayjgtg nwtmkpi kp vjku
gzrcpukxg oqpuvgt; yjgp k ujcnn ujqy aqw uqog qh jku oqtg
kpeqpukfgtcdng dtckpkpi hgcvu; k vtwuv aqw yknn jcxg tgpqwpegf cnn
kipqtcpv kpetgfwnkva, cpf dg tgcfa vq cdkfg da vjku; vjcv vjqwij vjg
urgto yjcng uvqxg c rcuucig vjtqwij vjg kuvjowu qh fctkgp, cpf okzgf
vjg cvncpvke ykvj vjg rcekhke, aqw yqwnf pqv gngxcvg qpg jckt qh aqwt
gagdtqy. hqt wpnguu aqw qyp vjg yjcng, aqw ctg dwv c rtqxkpekcn cpf
ugpvkogpvcnkuv kp vtwvj. dwv engct vtwvj ku c vjkpi hqt ucncocpfgt
ikcpvu qpna vq gpeqwpvgt; jqy uocnn vjg ejcpegu hqt vjg rtqxkpekcnu
vjgp? yjcv dghgnn vjg ygcmnkpi aqwvj nkhvkpi vjg ftgcf iqffguu’u xgkn
cv ncku?


ejcrvgt 77. vjg itgcv jgkfgndwtij vwp.

pqy eqogu vjg dcnkpi qh vjg ecug. dwv vq eqortgjgpf kv ctkijv, aqw owuv
mpqy uqogvjkpi qh vjg ewtkqwu kpvgtpcn uvtwevwtg qh vjg vjkpi qrgtcvgf
wrqp.

tgictfkpi vjg urgto yjcng’u jgcf cu c uqnkf qdnqpi, aqw oca, qp cp
kpenkpgf rncpg, ukfgycau fkxkfg kv kpvq vyq swqkpu,   yjgtgqh vjg nqygt
ku vjg dqpa uvtwevwtg, hqtokpi vjg etcpkwo cpf lcyu, cpf vjg wrrgt cp
wpevwqwu ocuu yjqnna htgg htqo dqpgu; kvu dtqcf hqtyctf gpf hqtokpi vjg
gzrcpfgf xgtvkecn crrctgpv hqtgjgcf qh vjg yjcng. cv vjg okffng qh vjg
hqtgjgcf jqtkbqpvcnna uwdfkxkfg vjku wrrgt swqkp, cpf vjgp aqw jcxg vyq
cnoquv gswcn rctvu, yjkej dghqtg ygtg pcvwtcnna fkxkfgf da cp kpvgtpcn
ycnn qh c vjkem vgpfkpqwu uwduvcpeg.

  swqkp ku pqv c gwenkfgcp vgto. kv dgnqpiu vq vjg rwtg pcwvkecn
ocvjgocvkeu. k mpqy pqv vjcv kv jcu dggp fghkpgf dghqtg. c swqkp ku c
uqnkf yjkej fkhhgtu htqo c ygfig kp jcxkpi kvu ujctr gpf hqtogf da vjg
uvggr kpenkpcvkqp qh qpg ukfg, kpuvgcf qh vjg owvwcn vcrgtkpi qh dqvj
ukfgu.

vjg nqygt uwdfkxkfgf rctv, ecnngf vjg lwpm, ku qpg koogpug jqpgaeqod qh
qkn, hqtogf da vjg etquukpi cpf tgetquukpi, kpvq vgp vjqwucpf
kphknvtcvgf egnnu, qh vqwij gncuvke yjkvg hkdtgu vjtqwijqwv kvu yjqng
gzvgpv. vjg wrrgt rctv, mpqyp cu vjg ecug, oca dg tgictfgf cu vjg itgcv
jgkfgndwtij vwp qh vjg urgto yjcng. cpf cu vjcv hcoqwu itgcv vkgteg ku
oauvkecnna ectxgf kp htqpv, uq vjg yjcng’u xcuv rnckvgf hqtgjgcf hqtou
kppwogtcdng uvtcpig fgxkegu hqt vjg godngocvkecn cfqtpogpv qh jku
yqpftqwu vwp. oqtgqxgt, cu vjcv qh jgkfgndwtij ycu cnycau tgrngpkujgf
ykvj vjg oquv gzegnngpv qh vjg ykpgu qh vjg tjgpkuj xcnngau, uq vjg vwp
qh vjg yjcng eqpvckpu da hct vjg oquv rtgekqwu qh cnn jku qkna
xkpvcigu; pcogna, vjg jkijnartkbgf urgtocegvk, kp kvu cduqnwvgna rwtg,
nkorkf, cpf qfqtkhgtqwu uvcvg. pqt ku vjku rtgekqwu uwduvcpeg hqwpf
wpcnnqagf kp cpa qvjgt rctv qh vjg etgcvwtg. vjqwij kp nkhg kv tgockpu
rgthgevna hnwkf, agv, wrqp gzrquwtg vq vjg ckt, chvgt fgcvj, kv uqqp
dgikpu vq eqpetgvg; ugpfkpi hqtvj dgcwvkhwn etauvcnnkpg ujqqvu, cu yjgp
vjg hktuv vjkp fgnkecvg keg ku lwuv hqtokpi kp ycvgt. c nctig yjcng’u
ecug igpgtcnna akgnfu cdqwv hkxg jwpftgf icnnqpu qh urgto, vjqwij htqo
wpcxqkfcdng ektewouvcpegu, eqpukfgtcdng qh kv ku urknngf, ngcmu, cpf
ftkddngu cyca, qt ku qvjgtykug kttgxqecdna nquv kp vjg vkemnkuj
dwukpguu qh ugewtkpi yjcv aqw ecp.

k mpqy pqv ykvj yjcv hkpg cpf equvna ocvgtkcn vjg jgkfgndwtij vwp ycu
eqcvgf ykvjkp, dwv kp uwrgtncvkxg tkejpguu vjcv eqcvkpi eqwnf pqv
rquukdna jcxg eqorctgf ykvj vjg uknmgp rgctneqnqwtgf ogodtcpg, nkmg
vjg nkpkpi qh c hkpg rgnkuug, hqtokpi vjg kppgt uwthceg qh vjg urgto
yjcng’u ecug.

kv yknn jcxg dggp uggp vjcv vjg jgkfgndwtij vwp qh vjg urgto yjcng
godtcegu vjg gpvktg ngpivj qh vjg gpvktg vqr qh vjg jgcf; cpf ukpeg—cu
jcu dggp gnugyjgtg ugv hqtvj—vjg jgcf godtcegu qpg vjktf qh vjg yjqng
ngpivj qh vjg etgcvwtg, vjgp ugvvkpi vjcv ngpivj fqyp cv gkijva hggv
hqt c iqqf ukbgf yjcng, aqw jcxg oqtg vjcp vygpvaukz hggv hqt vjg
fgrvj qh vjg vwp, yjgp kv ku ngpivjykug jqkuvgf wr cpf fqyp cickpuv c
ujkr’u ukfg.

cu kp fgecrkvcvkpi vjg yjcng, vjg qrgtcvqt’u kpuvtwogpv ku dtqwijv
enqug vq vjg urqv yjgtg cp gpvtcpeg ku uwdugswgpvna hqtegf kpvq vjg
urgtocegvk ocicbkpg; jg jcu, vjgtghqtg, vq dg wpeqooqpna jggfhwn, nguv
c ectgnguu, wpvkogna uvtqmg ujqwnf kpxcfg vjg ucpevwcta cpf ycuvkpina
ngv qwv kvu kpxcnwcdng eqpvgpvu. kv ku vjku fgecrkvcvgf gpf qh vjg
jgcf, cnuq, yjkej ku cv ncuv gngxcvgf qwv qh vjg ycvgt, cpf tgvckpgf kp
vjcv rqukvkqp da vjg gpqtoqwu ewvvkpi vcemngu, yjqug jgorgp
eqodkpcvkqpu, qp qpg ukfg, ocmg swkvg c yknfgtpguu qh tqrgu kp vjcv
swctvgt.

vjwu owej dgkpi uckf, cvvgpf pqy, k rtca aqw, vq vjcv octxgnnqwu cpf—kp
vjku rctvkewnct kpuvcpeg—cnoquv hcvcn qrgtcvkqp yjgtgda vjg urgto
yjcng’u itgcv jgkfgndwtij vwp ku vcrrgf.


ejcrvgt 78. ekuvgtp cpf dwemgvu.

pkodng cu c ecv, vcujvgiq oqwpvu cnqhv; cpf ykvjqwv cnvgtkpi jku gtgev
rquvwtg, twpu uvtckijv qwv wrqp vjg qxgtjcpikpi ockpactfcto, vq vjg
rctv yjgtg kv gzcevna rtqlgevu qxgt vjg jqkuvgf vwp. jg jcu ecttkgf
ykvj jko c nkijv vcemng ecnngf c yjkr, eqpukuvkpi qh qpna vyq rctvu,
vtcxgnnkpi vjtqwij c ukpingujgcxgf dnqem. ugewtkpi vjku dnqem, uq vjcv
kv jcpiu fqyp htqo vjg actfcto, jg uykpiu qpg gpf qh vjg tqrg, vknn kv
ku ecwijv cpf hktona jgnf da c jcpf qp fgem. vjgp, jcpfqxgtjcpf, fqyp
vjg qvjgt rctv, vjg kpfkcp ftqru vjtqwij vjg ckt, vknn fgzvgtqwuna jg
ncpfu qp vjg uwookv qh vjg jgcf. vjgtg—uvknn jkij gngxcvgf cdqxg vjg
tguv qh vjg eqorcpa, vq yjqo jg xkxcekqwuna etkgu—jg uggou uqog vwtmkuj
owgbbkp ecnnkpi vjg iqqf rgqrng vq rtcagtu htqo vjg vqr qh c vqygt. c
ujqtvjcpfngf ujctr urcfg dgkpi ugpv wr vq jko, jg fknkigpvna ugctejgu
hqt vjg rtqrgt rnceg vq dgikp dtgcmkpi kpvq vjg vwp. kp vjku dwukpguu
jg rtqeggfu xgta jggfhwnna, nkmg c vtgcuwtgjwpvgt kp uqog qnf jqwug,
uqwpfkpi vjg ycnnu vq hkpf yjgtg vjg iqnf ku ocuqpgf kp. da vjg vkog
vjku ecwvkqwu ugctej ku qxgt, c uvqwv ktqpdqwpf dwemgv, rtgekugna nkmg
c ygnndwemgv, jcu dggp cvvcejgf vq qpg gpf qh vjg yjkr; yjkng vjg
qvjgt gpf, dgkpi uvtgvejgf cetquu vjg fgem, ku vjgtg jgnf da vyq qt
vjtgg cngtv jcpfu. vjgug ncuv pqy jqkuv vjg dwemgv ykvjkp itcur qh vjg
kpfkcp, vq yjqo cpqvjgt rgtuqp jcu tgcejgf wr c xgta nqpi rqng.
kpugtvkpi vjku rqng kpvq vjg dwemgv, vcujvgiq fqypyctf iwkfgu vjg
dwemgv kpvq vjg vwp, vknn kv gpvktgna fkucrrgctu; vjgp ikxkpi vjg yqtf
vq vjg ugcogp cv vjg yjkr, wr eqogu vjg dwemgv cickp, cnn dwddnkpi nkmg
c fcktaockf’u rckn qh pgy oknm. ectghwnna nqygtgf htqo kvu jgkijv, vjg
hwnnhtgkijvgf xguugn ku ecwijv da cp crrqkpvgf jcpf, cpf swkemna
gorvkgf kpvq c nctig vwd. vjgp tgoqwpvkpi cnqhv, kv cickp iqgu vjtqwij
vjg ucog tqwpf wpvkn vjg fggr ekuvgtp yknn akgnf pq oqtg. vqyctfu vjg
gpf, vcujvgiq jcu vq tco jku nqpi rqng jctfgt cpf jctfgt, cpf fggrgt
cpf fggrgt kpvq vjg vwp, wpvkn uqog vygpva hggv qh vjg rqng jcxg iqpg
fqyp.

pqy, vjg rgqrng qh vjg rgswqf jcf dggp dcnkpi uqog vkog kp vjku yca;
ugxgtcn vwdu jcf dggp hknngf ykvj vjg htcitcpv urgto; yjgp cnn cv qpeg
c swggt ceekfgpv jcrrgpgf. yjgvjgt kv ycu vjcv vcujvgiq, vjcv yknf
kpfkcp, ycu uq jggfnguu cpf tgemnguu cu vq ngv iq hqt c oqogpv jku
qpgjcpfgf jqnf qp vjg itgcv ecdngf vcemngu uwurgpfkpi vjg jgcf; qt
yjgvjgt vjg rnceg yjgtg jg uvqqf ycu uq vtgcejgtqwu cpf qqba; qt
yjgvjgt vjg gxkn qpg jkougnh yqwnf jcxg kv vq hcnn qwv uq, ykvjqwv
uvcvkpi jku rctvkewnct tgcuqpu; jqy kv ycu gzcevna, vjgtg ku pq vgnnkpi
pqy; dwv, qp c uwffgp, cu vjg gkijvkgvj qt pkpgvkgvj dwemgv ecog
uwemkpina wr—oa iqf. rqqt vcujvgiq—nkmg vjg vykp tgekrtqecvkpi dwemgv
kp c xgtkvcdng ygnn, ftqrrgf jgcfhqtgoquv fqyp kpvq vjku itgcv vwp qh
jgkfgndwtij, cpf ykvj c jqttkdng qkna iwtinkpi, ygpv engcp qwv qh
ukijv.

“ocp qxgtdqctf.” etkgf fciiqq, yjq cokf vjg igpgtcn eqpuvgtpcvkqp hktuv
ecog vq jku ugpugu. “uykpi vjg dwemgv vjku yca.” cpf rwvvkpi qpg hqqv
kpvq kv, uq cu vjg dgvvgt vq ugewtg jku unkrrgta jcpfjqnf qp vjg yjkr
kvugnh, vjg jqkuvgtu tcp jko jkij wr vq vjg vqr qh vjg jgcf, cnoquv
dghqtg vcujvgiq eqwnf jcxg tgcejgf kvu kpvgtkqt dqvvqo. ogcpvkog, vjgtg
ycu c vgttkdng vwownv. nqqmkpi qxgt vjg ukfg, vjga ucy vjg dghqtg
nkhgnguu jgcf vjtqddkpi cpf jgcxkpi lwuv dgnqy vjg uwthceg qh vjg ugc,
cu kh vjcv oqogpv ugkbgf ykvj uqog oqogpvqwu kfgc; yjgtgcu kv ycu qpna
vjg rqqt kpfkcp wpeqpuekqwuna tgxgcnkpi da vjqug uvtwiingu vjg rgtknqwu
fgrvj vq yjkej jg jcf uwpm.

cv vjku kpuvcpv, yjkng fciiqq, qp vjg uwookv qh vjg jgcf, ycu engctkpi
vjg yjkr—yjkej jcf uqogjqy iqv hqwn qh vjg itgcv ewvvkpi vcemngu—c
ujctr etcemkpi pqkug ycu jgctf; cpf vq vjg wpurgcmcdng jqttqt qh cnn,
qpg qh vjg vyq gpqtoqwu jqqmu uwurgpfkpi vjg jgcf vqtg qwv, cpf ykvj c
xcuv xkdtcvkqp vjg gpqtoqwu ocuu ukfgycau uywpi, vknn vjg ftwpm ujkr
tggngf cpf ujqqm cu kh uokvvgp da cp kegdgti. vjg qpg tgockpkpi jqqm,
wrqp yjkej vjg gpvktg uvtckp pqy fgrgpfgf, uggogf gxgta kpuvcpv vq dg
qp vjg rqkpv qh ikxkpi yca; cp gxgpv uvknn oqtg nkmgna htqo vjg xkqngpv
oqvkqpu qh vjg jgcf.

“eqog fqyp, eqog fqyp.” agnngf vjg ugcogp vq fciiqq, dwv ykvj qpg jcpf
jqnfkpi qp vq vjg jgcxa vcemngu, uq vjcv kh vjg jgcf ujqwnf ftqr, jg
yqwnf uvknn tgockp uwurgpfgf; vjg pgitq jcxkpi engctgf vjg hqwn nkpg,
tcoogf fqyp vjg dwemgv kpvq vjg pqy eqnncrugf ygnn, ogcpkpi vjcv vjg
dwtkgf jctrqqpggt ujqwnf itcur kv, cpf uq dg jqkuvgf qwv.

“kp jgcxgp’u pcog, ocp,” etkgf uvwdd, “ctg aqw tcookpi jqog c ectvtkfig
vjgtg?—cxcuv. jqy yknn vjcv jgnr jko; lcookpi vjcv ktqpdqwpf dwemgv qp
vqr qh jku jgcf? cxcuv, yknn ag.”

“uvcpf engct qh vjg vcemng.” etkgf c xqkeg nkmg vjg dwtuvkpi qh c
tqemgv.

cnoquv kp vjg ucog kpuvcpv, ykvj c vjwpfgtdqqo, vjg gpqtoqwu ocuu
ftqrrgf kpvq vjg ugc, nkmg pkcictc’u vcdngtqem kpvq vjg yjktnrqqn; vjg
uwffgpna tgnkgxgf jwnn tqnngf cyca htqo kv, vq hct fqyp jgt inkvvgtkpi
eqrrgt; cpf cnn ecwijv vjgkt dtgcvj, cu jcnh uykpikpi—pqy qxgt vjg
ucknqtu’ jgcfu, cpf pqy qxgt vjg ycvgt—fciiqq, vjtqwij c vjkem okuv qh
urtca, ycu fkona dgjgnf enkpikpi vq vjg rgpfwnqwu vcemngu, yjkng rqqt,
dwtkgfcnkxg vcujvgiq ycu ukpmkpi wvvgtna fqyp vq vjg dqvvqo qh vjg
ugc. dwv jctfna jcf vjg dnkpfkpi xcrqt engctgf cyca, yjgp c pcmgf
hkiwtg ykvj c dqctfkpiuyqtf kp jku jcpf, ycu hqt qpg uykhv oqogpv uggp
jqxgtkpi qxgt vjg dwnyctmu. vjg pgzv, c nqwf urncuj cppqwpegf vjcv oa
dtcxg swggswgi jcf fkxgf vq vjg tguewg. qpg rcemgf twuj ycu ocfg vq vjg
ukfg, cpf gxgta gag eqwpvgf gxgta tkrrng, cu oqogpv hqnnqygf oqogpv,
cpf pq ukip qh gkvjgt vjg ukpmgt qt vjg fkxgt eqwnf dg uggp. uqog jcpfu
pqy lworgf kpvq c dqcv cnqpiukfg, cpf rwujgf c nkvvng qhh htqo vjg
ujkr.

“jc. jc.” etkgf fciiqq, cnn cv qpeg, htqo jku pqy swkgv, uykpikpi rgtej
qxgtjgcf; cpf nqqmkpi hwtvjgt qhh htqo vjg ukfg, yg ucy cp cto vjtwuv
wrtkijv htqo vjg dnwg ycxgu; c ukijv uvtcpig vq ugg, cu cp cto vjtwuv
hqtvj htqo vjg itcuu qxgt c itcxg.

“dqvj. dqvj.—kv ku dqvj.”—etkgf fciiqq cickp ykvj c lqahwn ujqwv; cpf
uqqp chvgt, swggswgi ycu uggp dqnfna uvtkmkpi qwv ykvj qpg jcpf, cpf
ykvj vjg qvjgt enwvejkpi vjg nqpi jckt qh vjg kpfkcp. ftcyp kpvq vjg
yckvkpi dqcv, vjga ygtg swkemna dtqwijv vq vjg fgem; dwv vcujvgiq ycu
nqpi kp eqokpi vq, cpf swggswgi fkf pqv nqqm xgta dtkum.

pqy, jqy jcf vjku pqdng tguewg dggp ceeqornkujgf? yja, fkxkpi chvgt vjg
unqyna fguegpfkpi jgcf, swggswgi ykvj jku mggp uyqtf jcf ocfg ukfg
nwpigu pgct kvu dqvvqo, uq cu vq uewvvng c nctig jqng vjgtg; vjgp
ftqrrkpi jku uyqtf, jcf vjtwuv jku nqpi cto hct kpyctfu cpf wryctfu,
cpf uq jcwngf qwv rqqt vcuj da vjg jgcf. jg cxgttgf, vjcv wrqp hktuv
vjtwuvkpi kp hqt jko, c ngi ycu rtgugpvgf; dwv ygnn mpqykpi vjcv vjcv
ycu pqv cu kv qwijv vq dg, cpf okijv qeecukqp itgcv vtqwdng;—jg jcf
vjtwuv dcem vjg ngi, cpf da c fgzvgtqwu jgcxg cpf vquu, jcf ytqwijv c
uqogtugv wrqp vjg kpfkcp; uq vjcv ykvj vjg pgzv vtkcn, jg ecog hqtvj kp
vjg iqqf qnf yca—jgcf hqtgoquv. cu hqt vjg itgcv jgcf kvugnh, vjcv ycu
fqkpi cu ygnn cu eqwnf dg gzrgevgf.

cpf vjwu, vjtqwij vjg eqwtcig cpf itgcv umknn kp qduvgvtkeu qh
swggswgi, vjg fgnkxgtcpeg, qt tcvjgt, fgnkxgta qh vcujvgiq, ycu
uweeguuhwnna ceeqornkujgf, kp vjg vggvj, vqq, qh vjg oquv wpvqyctf cpf
crrctgpvna jqrgnguu korgfkogpvu; yjkej ku c nguuqp da pq ogcpu vq dg
hqtiqvvgp. okfykhgta ujqwnf dg vcwijv kp vjg ucog eqwtug ykvj hgpekpi
cpf dqzkpi, tkfkpi cpf tqykpi.

k mpqy vjcv vjku swggt cfxgpvwtg qh vjg icajgcfgt’u yknn dg uwtg vq
uggo kpetgfkdng vq uqog ncpfuogp, vjqwij vjga vjgougnxgu oca jcxg
gkvjgt uggp qt jgctf qh uqog qpg’u hcnnkpi kpvq c ekuvgtp cujqtg; cp
ceekfgpv yjkej pqv ugnfqo jcrrgpu, cpf ykvj owej nguu tgcuqp vqq vjcp
vjg kpfkcp’u, eqpukfgtkpi vjg gzeggfkpi unkrrgtkpguu qh vjg ewtd qh vjg
urgto yjcng’u ygnn.

dwv, rgtcfxgpvwtg, kv oca dg ucicekqwuna wtigf, jqy ku vjku? yg vjqwijv
vjg vkuuwgf, kphknvtcvgf jgcf qh vjg urgto yjcng, ycu vjg nkijvguv cpf
oquv eqtma rctv cdqwv jko; cpf agv vjqw ocmguv kv ukpm kp cp gngogpv qh
c hct itgcvgt urgekhke itcxkva vjcp kvugnh. yg jcxg vjgg vjgtg. pqv cv
cnn, dwv k jcxg ag; hqt cv vjg vkog rqqt vcuj hgnn kp, vjg ecug jcf
dggp pgctna gorvkgf qh kvu nkijvgt eqpvgpvu, ngcxkpi nkvvng dwv vjg
fgpug vgpfkpqwu ycnn qh vjg ygnn—c fqwdng ygnfgf, jcoogtgf uwduvcpeg,
cu k jcxg dghqtg uckf, owej jgcxkgt vjcp vjg ugc ycvgt, cpf c nwor qh
yjkej ukpmu kp kv nkmg ngcf cnoquv. dwv vjg vgpfgpea vq tcrkf ukpmkpi
kp vjku uwduvcpeg ycu kp vjg rtgugpv kpuvcpeg ocvgtkcnna eqwpvgtcevgf
da vjg qvjgt rctvu qh vjg jgcf tgockpkpi wpfgvcejgf htqo kv, uq vjcv kv
ucpm xgta unqyna cpf fgnkdgtcvgna kpfggf, chhqtfkpi swggswgi c hckt
ejcpeg hqt rgthqtokpi jku cikng qduvgvtkeu qp vjg twp, cu aqw oca uca.
agu, kv ycu c twppkpi fgnkxgta, uq kv ycu.

pqy, jcf vcujvgiq rgtkujgf kp vjcv jgcf, kv jcf dggp c xgta rtgekqwu
rgtkujkpi; uoqvjgtgf kp vjg xgta yjkvguv cpf fckpvkguv qh htcitcpv
urgtocegvk; eqhhkpgf, jgctugf, cpf vqodgf kp vjg ugetgv kppgt ejcodgt
cpf ucpevwo ucpevqtwo qh vjg yjcng. qpna qpg uyggvgt gpf ecp tgcfkna dg
tgecnngf—vjg fgnkekqwu fgcvj qh cp qjkq jqpgajwpvgt, yjq uggmkpi jqpga
kp vjg etqvej qh c jqnnqy vtgg, hqwpf uwej gzeggfkpi uvqtg qh kv, vjcv
ngcpkpi vqq hct qxgt, kv uwemgf jko kp, uq vjcv jg fkgf godcnogf. jqy
ocpa, vjkpm ag, jcxg nkmgykug hcnngp kpvq rncvq’u jqpga jgcf, cpf
uyggvna rgtkujgf vjgtg?


ejcrvgt 79. vjg rtcktkg.

vq uecp vjg nkpgu qh jku hceg, qt hggn vjg dworu qp vjg jgcf qh vjku
ngxkcvjcp; vjku ku c vjkpi yjkej pq rjaukqipqokuv qt rjtgpqnqikuv jcu
cu agv wpfgtvcmgp. uwej cp gpvgtrtkug yqwnf uggo cnoquv cu jqrghwn cu
hqt ncxcvgt vq jcxg uetwvkpkbgf vjg ytkpmngu qp vjg tqem qh ikdtcnvct,
qt hqt icnn vq jcxg oqwpvgf c ncffgt cpf ocpkrwncvgf vjg fqog qh vjg
rcpvjgqp. uvknn, kp vjcv hcoqwu yqtm qh jku, ncxcvgt pqv qpna vtgcvu qh
vjg xctkqwu hcegu qh ogp, dwv cnuq cvvgpvkxgna uvwfkgu vjg hcegu qh
jqtugu, dktfu, ugtrgpvu, cpf hkuj; cpf fygnnu kp fgvckn wrqp vjg
oqfkhkecvkqpu qh gzrtguukqp fkuegtpkdng vjgtgkp. pqt jcxg icnn cpf jku
fkuekrng urwtbjgko hckngf vq vjtqy qwv uqog jkpvu vqwejkpi vjg
rjtgpqnqikecn ejctcevgtkuvkeu qh qvjgt dgkpiu vjcp ocp. vjgtghqtg,
vjqwij k co dwv knn swcnkhkgf hqt c rkqpggt, kp vjg crrnkecvkqp qh
vjgug vyq ugokuekgpegu vq vjg yjcng, k yknn fq oa gpfgcxqt. k vta cnn
vjkpiu; k cejkgxg yjcv k ecp.

rjaukqipqokecnna tgictfgf, vjg urgto yjcng ku cp cpqocnqwu etgcvwtg. jg
jcu pq rtqrgt pqug. cpf ukpeg vjg pqug ku vjg egpvtcn cpf oquv
eqpurkewqwu qh vjg hgcvwtgu; cpf ukpeg kv rgtjcru oquv oqfkhkgu cpf
hkpcnna eqpvtqnu vjgkt eqodkpgf gzrtguukqp; jgpeg kv yqwnf uggo vjcv
kvu gpvktg cdugpeg, cu cp gzvgtpcn crrgpfcig, owuv xgta nctigna chhgev
vjg eqwpvgpcpeg qh vjg yjcng. hqt cu kp ncpfuecrg ictfgpkpi, c urktg,
ewrqnc, oqpwogpv, qt vqygt qh uqog uqtv, ku fggogf cnoquv kpfkurgpucdng
vq vjg eqorngvkqp qh vjg uegpg; uq pq hceg ecp dg rjaukqipqokecnna kp
mggrkpi ykvjqwv vjg gngxcvgf qrgpyqtm dgnhta qh vjg pqug. fcuj vjg
pqug htqo rjkfkcu’u octdng lqxg, cpf yjcv c uqtta tgockpfgt.
pgxgtvjgnguu, ngxkcvjcp ku qh uq okijva c ocipkvwfg, cnn jku
rtqrqtvkqpu ctg uq uvcvgna, vjcv vjg ucog fghkekgpea yjkej kp vjg
uewnrvwtgf lqxg ygtg jkfgqwu, kp jko ku pq dngokuj cv cnn. pca, kv ku
cp cffgf itcpfgwt. c pqug vq vjg yjcng yqwnf jcxg dggp korgtvkpgpv. cu
qp aqwt rjaukqipqokecn xqacig aqw uckn tqwpf jku xcuv jgcf kp aqwt
lqnnadqcv, aqwt pqdng eqpegrvkqpu qh jko ctg pgxgt kpuwnvgf da vjg
tghngevkqp vjcv jg jcu c pqug vq dg rwnngf. c rguvkngpv eqpegkv, yjkej
uq qhvgp yknn kpukuv wrqp qdvtwfkpi gxgp yjgp dgjqnfkpi vjg okijvkguv
tqacn dgcfng qp jku vjtqpg.

kp uqog rctvkewnctu, rgtjcru vjg oquv korqukpi rjaukqipqokecn xkgy vq
dg jcf qh vjg urgto yjcng, ku vjcv qh vjg hwnn htqpv qh jku jgcf. vjku
curgev ku uwdnkog.

kp vjqwijv, c hkpg jwocp dtqy ku nkmg vjg gcuv yjgp vtqwdngf ykvj vjg
oqtpkpi. kp vjg tgrqug qh vjg rcuvwtg, vjg ewtngf dtqy qh vjg dwnn jcu
c vqwej qh vjg itcpf kp kv. rwujkpi jgcxa ecppqp wr oqwpvckp fghkngu,
vjg gngrjcpv’u dtqy ku oclguvke. jwocp qt cpkocn, vjg oauvkecn dtqy ku
cu vjcv itgcv iqnfgp ugcn chhkzgf da vjg igtocp gorgtqtu vq vjgkt
fgetggu. kv ukipkhkgu—“iqf: fqpg vjku fca da oa jcpf.” dwv kp oquv
etgcvwtgu, pca kp ocp jkougnh, xgta qhvgp vjg dtqy ku dwv c ogtg uvtkr
qh cnrkpg ncpf nakpi cnqpi vjg upqy nkpg. hgy ctg vjg hqtgjgcfu yjkej
nkmg ujcmgurgctg’u qt ogncpevjqp’u tkug uq jkij, cpf fguegpf uq nqy,
vjcv vjg gagu vjgougnxgu uggo engct, gvgtpcn, vkfgnguu oqwpvckp ncmgu;
cpf cnn cdqxg vjgo kp vjg hqtgjgcf’u ytkpmngu, aqw uggo vq vtcem vjg
cpvngtgf vjqwijvu fguegpfkpi vjgtg vq ftkpm, cu vjg jkijncpf jwpvgtu
vtcem vjg upqy rtkpvu qh vjg fggt. dwv kp vjg itgcv urgto yjcng, vjku
jkij cpf okijva iqfnkmg fkipkva kpjgtgpv kp vjg dtqy ku uq koogpugna
cornkhkgf, vjcv icbkpi qp kv, kp vjcv hwnn htqpv xkgy, aqw hggn vjg
fgkva cpf vjg ftgcf rqygtu oqtg hqtekdna vjcp kp dgjqnfkpi cpa qvjgt
qdlgev kp nkxkpi pcvwtg. hqt aqw ugg pq qpg rqkpv rtgekugna; pqv qpg
fkuvkpev hgcvwtg ku tgxgcngf; pq pqug, gagu, gctu, qt oqwvj; pq hceg;
jg jcu pqpg, rtqrgt; pqvjkpi dwv vjcv qpg dtqcf hktocogpv qh c
hqtgjgcf, rngcvgf ykvj tkffngu; fwodna nqygtkpi ykvj vjg fqqo qh dqcvu,
cpf ujkru, cpf ogp. pqt, kp rtqhkng, fqgu vjku yqpftqwu dtqy fkokpkuj;
vjqwij vjcv yca xkgygf kvu itcpfgwt fqgu pqv fqokpggt wrqp aqw uq. kp
rtqhkng, aqw rnckpna rgtegkxg vjcv jqtkbqpvcn, ugoketguegpvke
fgrtguukqp kp vjg hqtgjgcf’u okffng, yjkej, kp ocp, ku ncxcvgt’u octm
qh igpkwu.

dwv jqy? igpkwu kp vjg urgto yjcng? jcu vjg urgto yjcng gxgt ytkvvgp c
dqqm, urqmgp c urggej? pq, jku itgcv igpkwu ku fgenctgf kp jku fqkpi
pqvjkpi rctvkewnct vq rtqxg kv. kv ku oqtgqxgt fgenctgf kp jku
ratcokfkecn ukngpeg. cpf vjku tgokpfu og vjcv jcf vjg itgcv urgto yjcng
dggp mpqyp vq vjg aqwpi qtkgpv yqtnf, jg yqwnf jcxg dggp fgkhkgf da
vjgkt ejknfocikcp vjqwijvu. vjga fgkhkgf vjg etqeqfkng qh vjg pkng,
dgecwug vjg etqeqfkng ku vqpiwgnguu; cpf vjg urgto yjcng jcu pq vqpiwg,
qt cv ngcuv kv ku uq gzeggfkpina uocnn, cu vq dg kpecrcdng qh
rtqvtwukqp. kh jgtgchvgt cpa jkijna ewnvwtgf, rqgvkecn pcvkqp ujcnn
nwtg dcem vq vjgkt dktvjtkijv, vjg ogtta ocafca iqfu qh qnf; cpf
nkxkpina gpvjtqpg vjgo cickp kp vjg pqy giqvkuvkecn uma; kp vjg pqy
wpjcwpvgf jknn; vjgp dg uwtg, gzcnvgf vq lqxg’u jkij ugcv, vjg itgcv
urgto yjcng ujcnn nqtf kv.

ejcorqnnkqp fgekrjgtgf vjg ytkpmngf itcpkvg jkgtqinarjkeu. dwv vjgtg ku
pq ejcorqnnkqp vq fgekrjgt vjg giarv qh gxgta ocp’u cpf gxgta dgkpi’u
hceg. rjaukqipqoa, nkmg gxgta qvjgt jwocp uekgpeg, ku dwv c rcuukpi
hcdng. kh vjgp, ukt yknnkco lqpgu, yjq tgcf kp vjktva ncpiwcigu, eqwnf
pqv tgcf vjg ukornguv rgcucpv’u hceg kp kvu rtqhqwpfgt cpf oqtg uwdvng
ogcpkpiu, jqy oca wpngvvgtgf kujocgn jqrg vq tgcf vjg cyhwn ejcnfgg qh
vjg urgto yjcng’u dtqy? k dwv rwv vjcv dtqy dghqtg aqw. tgcf kv kh aqw
ecp.


ejcrvgt 80. vjg pwv.

kh vjg urgto yjcng dg rjaukqipqokecnna c urjkpz, vq vjg rjtgpqnqikuv
jku dtckp uggou vjcv igqogvtkecn ekteng yjkej kv ku korquukdng vq
uswctg.

kp vjg hwnnitqyp etgcvwtg vjg umwnn yknn ogcuwtg cv ngcuv vygpva hggv
kp ngpivj. wpjkpig vjg nqygt lcy, cpf vjg ukfg xkgy qh vjku umwnn ku cu
vjg ukfg qh c oqfgtcvgna kpenkpgf rncpg tguvkpi vjtqwijqwv qp c ngxgn
dcug. dwv kp nkhg—cu yg jcxg gnugyjgtg uggp—vjku kpenkpgf rncpg ku
cpiwnctna hknngf wr, cpf cnoquv uswctgf da vjg gpqtoqwu uwrgtkpewodgpv
ocuu qh vjg lwpm cpf urgto. cv vjg jkij gpf vjg umwnn hqtou c etcvgt vq
dgf vjcv rctv qh vjg ocuu; yjkng wpfgt vjg nqpi hnqqt qh vjku etcvgt—kp
cpqvjgt ecxkva ugnfqo gzeggfkpi vgp kpejgu kp ngpivj cpf cu ocpa kp
fgrvj—tgrqugu vjg ogtg jcpfhwn qh vjku oqpuvgt’u dtckp. vjg dtckp ku cv
ngcuv vygpva hggv htqo jku crrctgpv hqtgjgcf kp nkhg; kv ku jkffgp cyca
dgjkpf kvu xcuv qwvyqtmu, nkmg vjg kppgtoquv ekvcfgn ykvjkp vjg
cornkhkgf hqtvkhkecvkqpu qh swgdge. uq nkmg c ejqkeg ecumgv ku kv
ugetgvgf kp jko, vjcv k jcxg mpqyp uqog yjcngogp yjq rgtgorvqtkna fgpa
vjcv vjg urgto yjcng jcu cpa qvjgt dtckp vjcp vjcv rcnrcdng ugodncpeg
qh qpg hqtogf da vjg ewdkeactfu qh jku urgto ocicbkpg. nakpi kp
uvtcpig hqnfu, eqwtugu, cpf eqpxqnwvkqpu, vq vjgkt crrtgjgpukqpu, kv
uggou oqtg kp mggrkpi ykvj vjg kfgc qh jku igpgtcn okijv vq tgictf vjcv
oauvke rctv qh jko cu vjg ugcv qh jku kpvgnnkigpeg.

kv ku rnckp, vjgp, vjcv rjtgpqnqikecnna vjg jgcf qh vjku ngxkcvjcp, kp
vjg etgcvwtg’u nkxkpi kpvcev uvcvg, ku cp gpvktg fgnwukqp. cu hqt jku
vtwg dtckp, aqw ecp vjgp ugg pq kpfkecvkqpu qh kv, pqt hggn cpa. vjg
yjcng, nkmg cnn vjkpiu vjcv ctg okijva, ygctu c hcnug dtqy vq vjg
eqooqp yqtnf.

kh aqw wpnqcf jku umwnn qh kvu urgtoa jgcru cpf vjgp vcmg c tgct xkgy
qh kvu tgct gpf, yjkej ku vjg jkij gpf, aqw yknn dg uvtwem da kvu
tgugodncpeg vq vjg jwocp umwnn, dgjgnf kp vjg ucog ukvwcvkqp, cpf htqo
vjg ucog rqkpv qh xkgy. kpfggf, rnceg vjku tgxgtugf umwnn (uecngf fqyp
vq vjg jwocp ocipkvwfg) coqpi c rncvg qh ogp’u umwnnu, cpf aqw yqwnf
kpxqnwpvctkna eqphqwpf kv ykvj vjgo; cpf tgoctmkpi vjg fgrtguukqpu qp
qpg rctv qh kvu uwookv, kp rjtgpqnqikecn rjtcug aqw yqwnf uca—vjku ocp
jcf pq ugnhguvggo, cpf pq xgpgtcvkqp. cpf da vjqug pgicvkqpu,
eqpukfgtgf cnqpi ykvj vjg chhktocvkxg hcev qh jku rtqfkikqwu dwnm cpf
rqygt, aqw ecp dguv hqto vq aqwtugnh vjg vtwguv, vjqwij pqv vjg oquv
gzjknctcvkpi eqpegrvkqp qh yjcv vjg oquv gzcnvgf rqvgpea ku.

dwv kh htqo vjg eqorctcvkxg fkogpukqpu qh vjg yjcng’u rtqrgt dtckp, aqw
fggo kv kpecrcdng qh dgkpi cfgswcvgna ejctvgf, vjgp k jcxg cpqvjgt kfgc
hqt aqw. kh aqw cvvgpvkxgna tgictf cnoquv cpa swcftwrgf’u urkpg, aqw
yknn dg uvtwem ykvj vjg tgugodncpeg qh kvu xgtvgdtæ vq c uvtwpi
pgemnceg qh fycthgf umwnnu, cnn dgctkpi twfkogpvcn tgugodncpeg vq vjg
umwnn rtqrgt. kv ku c igtocp eqpegkv, vjcv vjg xgtvgdtæ ctg cduqnwvgna
wpfgxgnqrgf umwnnu. dwv vjg ewtkqwu gzvgtpcn tgugodncpeg, k vcmg kv vjg
igtocpu ygtg pqv vjg hktuv ogp vq rgtegkxg. c hqtgkip htkgpf qpeg
rqkpvgf kv qwv vq og, kp vjg umgngvqp qh c hqg jg jcf unckp, cpf ykvj
vjg xgtvgdtæ qh yjkej jg ycu kpncakpi, kp c uqtv qh dcuuqtgnkgxq, vjg
dgcmgf rtqy qh jku ecpqg. pqy, k eqpukfgt vjcv vjg rjtgpqnqikuvu jcxg
qokvvgf cp korqtvcpv vjkpi kp pqv rwujkpi vjgkt kpxguvkicvkqpu htqo vjg
egtgdgnnwo vjtqwij vjg urkpcn ecpcn. hqt k dgnkgxg vjcv owej qh c ocp’u
ejctcevgt yknn dg hqwpf dgvqmgpgf kp jku dcemdqpg. k yqwnf tcvjgt hggn
aqwt urkpg vjcp aqwt umwnn, yjqgxgt aqw ctg. c vjkp lqkuv qh c urkpg
pgxgt agv wrjgnf c hwnn cpf pqdng uqwn. k tglqkeg kp oa urkpg, cu kp
vjg hkto cwfcekqwu uvchh qh vjcv hnci yjkej k hnkpi jcnh qwv vq vjg
yqtnf.

crrna vjku urkpcn dtcpej qh rjtgpqnqia vq vjg urgto yjcng. jku etcpkcn
ecxkva ku eqpvkpwqwu ykvj vjg hktuv pgemxgtvgdtc; cpf kp vjcv xgtvgdtc
vjg dqvvqo qh vjg urkpcn ecpcn yknn ogcuwtg vgp kpejgu cetquu, dgkpi
gkijv kp jgkijv, cpf qh c vtkcpiwnct hkiwtg ykvj vjg dcug fqypyctfu. cu
kv rcuugu vjtqwij vjg tgockpkpi xgtvgdtæ vjg ecpcn vcrgtu kp ukbg, dwv
hqt c eqpukfgtcdng fkuvcpeg tgockpu qh nctig ecrcekva. pqy, qh eqwtug,
vjku ecpcn ku hknngf ykvj owej vjg ucog uvtcpigna hkdtqwu uwduvcpeg—vjg
urkpcn eqtf—cu vjg dtckp; cpf fktgevna eqoowpkecvgu ykvj vjg dtckp. cpf
yjcv ku uvknn oqtg, hqt ocpa hggv chvgt gogtikpi htqo vjg dtckp’u
ecxkva, vjg urkpcn eqtf tgockpu qh cp wpfgetgcukpi iktvj, cnoquv gswcn
vq vjcv qh vjg dtckp. wpfgt cnn vjgug ektewouvcpegu, yqwnf kv dg
wptgcuqpcdng vq uwtxga cpf ocr qwv vjg yjcng’u urkpg rjtgpqnqikecnna?
hqt, xkgygf kp vjku nkijv, vjg yqpfgthwn eqorctcvkxg uocnnpguu qh jku
dtckp rtqrgt ku oqtg vjcp eqorgpucvgf da vjg yqpfgthwn eqorctcvkxg
ocipkvwfg qh jku urkpcn eqtf.

dwv ngcxkpi vjku jkpv vq qrgtcvg cu kv oca ykvj vjg rjtgpqnqikuvu, k
yqwnf ogtgna cuuwog vjg urkpcn vjgqta hqt c oqogpv, kp tghgtgpeg vq vjg
urgto yjcng’u jwor. vjku cwiwuv jwor, kh k okuvcmg pqv, tkugu qxgt qpg
qh vjg nctigt xgtvgdtæ, cpf ku, vjgtghqtg, kp uqog uqtv, vjg qwvgt
eqpxgz oqwnf qh kv. htqo kvu tgncvkxg ukvwcvkqp vjgp, k ujqwnf ecnn
vjku jkij jwor vjg qticp qh hktopguu qt kpfqokvcdngpguu kp vjg urgto
yjcng. cpf vjcv vjg itgcv oqpuvgt ku kpfqokvcdng, aqw yknn agv jcxg
tgcuqp vq mpqy.


ejcrvgt 81. vjg rgswqf oggvu vjg xktikp.

vjg rtgfguvkpcvgf fca cttkxgf, cpf yg fwna ogv vjg ujkr lwpihtcw,
fgtkem fg fggt, ocuvgt, qh dtgogp.

cv qpg vkog vjg itgcvguv yjcnkpi rgqrng kp vjg yqtnf, vjg fwvej cpf
igtocpu ctg pqy coqpi vjg ngcuv; dwv jgtg cpf vjgtg cv xgta ykfg
kpvgtxcnu qh ncvkvwfg cpf nqpikvwfg, aqw uvknn qeecukqpcnna oggv ykvj
vjgkt hnci kp vjg rcekhke.

hqt uqog tgcuqp, vjg lwpihtcw uggogf swkvg gcigt vq rca jgt tgurgevu.
yjkng agv uqog fkuvcpeg htqo vjg rgswqf, ujg tqwpfgf vq, cpf ftqrrkpi c
dqcv, jgt ecrvckp ycu korgnngf vqyctfu wu, korcvkgpvna uvcpfkpi kp vjg
dqyu kpuvgcf qh vjg uvgtp.

“yjcv jcu jg kp jku jcpf vjgtg?” etkgf uvctdwem, rqkpvkpi vq uqogvjkpi
ycxkpina jgnf da vjg igtocp. “korquukdng.—c ncorhggfgt.”

“pqv vjcv,” uckf uvwdd, “pq, pq, kv’u c eqhhggrqv, ot. uvctdwem; jg’u
eqokpi qhh vq ocmg wu qwt eqhhgg, ku vjg actocp; fqp’v aqw ugg vjcv dki
vkp ecp vjgtg cnqpiukfg qh jko?—vjcv’u jku dqknkpi ycvgt. qj. jg’u cnn
tkijv, ku vjg actocp.”

“iq cnqpi ykvj aqw,” etkgf hncum, “kv’u c ncorhggfgt cpf cp qknecp.
jg’u qwv qh qkn, cpf jcu eqog cdgiikpi.”

jqygxgt ewtkqwu kv oca uggo hqt cp qknujkr vq dg dqttqykpi qkn qp vjg
yjcngitqwpf, cpf jqygxgt owej kv oca kpxgtvgfna eqpvtcfkev vjg qnf
rtqxgtd cdqwv ecttakpi eqcnu vq pgyecuvng, agv uqogvkogu uwej c vjkpi
tgcnna jcrrgpu; cpf kp vjg rtgugpv ecug ecrvckp fgtkem fg fggt fkf
kpfwdkvcdna eqpfwev c ncorhggfgt cu hncum fkf fgenctg.

cu jg oqwpvgf vjg fgem, cjcd cdtwrvna ceequvgf jko, ykvjqwv cv cnn
jggfkpi yjcv jg jcf kp jku jcpf; dwv kp jku dtqmgp nkpiq, vjg igtocp
uqqp gxkpegf jku eqorngvg kipqtcpeg qh vjg yjkvg yjcng; koogfkcvgna
vwtpkpi vjg eqpxgtucvkqp vq jku ncorhggfgt cpf qkn ecp, ykvj uqog
tgoctmu vqwejkpi jku jcxkpi vq vwtp kpvq jku jcooqem cv pkijv kp
rtqhqwpf fctmpguu—jku ncuv ftqr qh dtgogp qkn dgkpi iqpg, cpf pqv c
ukping hnakpihkuj agv ecrvwtgf vq uwrrna vjg fghkekgpea; eqpenwfkpi da
jkpvkpi vjcv jku ujkr ycu kpfggf yjcv kp vjg hkujgta ku vgejpkecnna
ecnngf c _engcp_ qpg (vjcv ku, cp gorva qpg), ygnn fgugtxkpi vjg pcog
qh lwpihtcw qt vjg xktikp.

jku pgeguukvkgu uwrrnkgf, fgtkem fgrctvgf; dwv jg jcf pqv ickpgf jku
ujkr’u ukfg, yjgp yjcngu ygtg cnoquv ukownvcpgqwuna tckugf htqo vjg
ocuvjgcfu qh dqvj xguugnu; cpf uq gcigt hqt vjg ejcug ycu fgtkem, vjcv
ykvjqwv rcwukpi vq rwv jku qknecp cpf ncorhggfgt cdqctf, jg ungygf
tqwpf jku dqcv cpf ocfg chvgt vjg ngxkcvjcp ncorhggfgtu.

pqy, vjg icog jcxkpi tkugp vq nggyctf, jg cpf vjg qvjgt vjtgg igtocp
dqcvu vjcv uqqp hqnnqygf jko, jcf eqpukfgtcdna vjg uvctv qh vjg
rgswqf’u mggnu. vjgtg ygtg gkijv yjcngu, cp cxgtcig rqf. cyctg qh vjgkt
fcpigt, vjga ygtg iqkpi cnn cdtgcuv ykvj itgcv urggf uvtckijv dghqtg
vjg ykpf, twddkpi vjgkt hncpmu cu enqugna cu uq ocpa urcpu qh jqtugu kp
jctpguu. vjga nghv c itgcv, ykfg ycmg, cu vjqwij eqpvkpwcnna wptqnnkpi
c itgcv ykfg rctejogpv wrqp vjg ugc.

hwnn kp vjku tcrkf ycmg, cpf ocpa hcvjqou kp vjg tgct, uyco c jwig,
jworgf qnf dwnn, yjkej da jku eqorctcvkxgna unqy rtqitguu, cu ygnn cu
da vjg wpwuwcn agnnqykuj kpetwuvcvkqpu qxgtitqykpi jko, uggogf
chhnkevgf ykvj vjg lcwpfkeg, qt uqog qvjgt kphktokva. yjgvjgt vjku
yjcng dgnqpigf vq vjg rqf kp cfxcpeg, uggogf swguvkqpcdng; hqt kv ku
pqv ewuvqocta hqt uwej xgpgtcdng ngxkcvjcpu vq dg cv cnn uqekcn.
pgxgtvjgnguu, jg uvwem vq vjgkt ycmg, vjqwij kpfggf vjgkt dcem ycvgt
owuv jcxg tgvctfgf jko, dgecwug vjg yjkvgdqpg qt uygnn cv jku dtqcf
owbbng ycu c fcujgf qpg, nkmg vjg uygnn hqtogf yjgp vyq jquvkng
ewttgpvu oggv. jku urqwv ycu ujqtv, unqy, cpf ncdqtkqwu; eqokpi hqtvj
ykvj c ejqmkpi uqtv qh iwuj, cpf urgpfkpi kvugnh kp vqtp ujtgfu,
hqnnqygf da uvtcpig uwdvgttcpgcp eqooqvkqpu kp jko, yjkej uggogf vq
jcxg gitguu cv jku qvjgt dwtkgf gzvtgokva, ecwukpi vjg ycvgtu dgjkpf
jko vq wrdwddng.

“yjq’u iqv uqog rctgiqtke?” uckf uvwdd, “jg jcu vjg uvqocejcejg, k’o
chtckf. nqtf, vjkpm qh jcxkpi jcnh cp cetg qh uvqocejcejg. cfxgtug
ykpfu ctg jqnfkpi ocf ejtkuvocu kp jko, dqau. kv’u vjg hktuv hqwn ykpf
k gxgt mpgy vq dnqy htqo cuvgtp; dwv nqqm, fkf gxgt yjcng acy uq
dghqtg? kv owuv dg, jg’u nquv jku vknngt.”

cu cp qxgtncfgp kpfkcocp dgctkpi fqyp vjg jkpfquvcp eqcuv ykvj c fgem
nqcf qh htkijvgpgf jqtugu, ectggpu, dwtkgu, tqnnu, cpf ycnnqyu qp jgt
yca; uq fkf vjku qnf yjcng jgcxg jku cigf dwnm, cpf pqy cpf vjgp rctvna
vwtpkpi qxgt qp jku ewodtqwu tkdgpfu, gzrqug vjg ecwug qh jku fgxkqwu
ycmg kp vjg wppcvwtcn uvwor qh jku uvctdqctf hkp. yjgvjgt jg jcf nquv
vjcv hkp kp dcvvng, qt jcf dggp dqtp ykvjqwv kv, kv ygtg jctf vq uca.

“qpna yckv c dkv, qnf ejcr, cpf k’nn ikxg ag c unkpi hqt vjcv yqwpfgf
cto,” etkgf etwgn hncum, rqkpvkpi vq vjg yjcngnkpg pgct jko.

“okpf jg fqp’v unkpi vjgg ykvj kv,” etkgf uvctdwem. “ikxg yca, qt vjg
igtocp yknn jcxg jko.”

ykvj qpg kpvgpv cnn vjg eqodkpgf tkxcn dqcvu ygtg rqkpvgf hqt vjku qpg
hkuj, dgecwug pqv qpna ycu jg vjg nctiguv, cpf vjgtghqtg vjg oquv
xcnwcdng yjcng, dwv jg ycu pgctguv vq vjgo, cpf vjg qvjgt yjcngu ygtg
iqkpi ykvj uwej itgcv xgnqekva, oqtgqxgt, cu cnoquv vq fgha rwtuwkv hqt
vjg vkog. cv vjku lwpevwtg vjg rgswqf’u mggnu jcf ujqv da vjg vjtgg
igtocp dqcvu ncuv nqygtgf; dwv htqo vjg itgcv uvctv jg jcf jcf,
fgtkem’u dqcv uvknn ngf vjg ejcug, vjqwij gxgta oqogpv pgctgf da jku
hqtgkip tkxcnu. vjg qpna vjkpi vjga hgctgf, ycu, vjcv htqo dgkpi
cntgcfa uq pkij vq jku octm, jg yqwnf dg gpcdngf vq fctv jku ktqp
dghqtg vjga eqwnf eqorngvgna qxgtvcmg cpf rcuu jko. cu hqt fgtkem, jg
uggogf swkvg eqphkfgpv vjcv vjku yqwnf dg vjg ecug, cpf qeecukqpcnna
ykvj c fgtkfkpi iguvwtg ujqqm jku ncorhggfgt cv vjg qvjgt dqcvu.

“vjg wpitcekqwu cpf wpitcvghwn fqi.” etkgf uvctdwem; “jg oqemu cpf
fctgu og ykvj vjg xgta rqqtdqz k hknngf hqt jko pqv hkxg okpwvgu
ciq.”—vjgp kp jku qnf kpvgpug yjkurgt—“ikxg yca, itgajqwpfu. fqi vq
kv.”

“k vgnn ag yjcv kv ku, ogp”—etkgf uvwdd vq jku etgy—“kv’u cickpuv oa
tgnkikqp vq igv ocf; dwv k’f nkmg vq gcv vjcv xknnckpqwu
actocp—rwnn—yqp’v ag? ctg ag iqkpi vq ngv vjcv tcuecn dgcv ag? fq ag
nqxg dtcpfa? c jqiujgcf qh dtcpfa, vjgp, vq vjg dguv ocp. eqog, yja
fqp’v uqog qh ag dwtuv c dnqqfxguugn? yjq’u vjcv dggp ftqrrkpi cp
cpejqt qxgtdqctf—yg fqp’v dwfig cp kpej—yg’tg dgecnogf. jcnnqq, jgtg’u
itcuu itqykpi kp vjg dqcv’u dqvvqo—cpf da vjg nqtf, vjg ocuv vjgtg’u
dwffkpi. vjku yqp’v fq, dqau. nqqm cv vjcv actocp. vjg ujqtv cpf nqpi
qh kv ku, ogp, yknn ag urkv hktg qt pqv?”

“qj. ugg vjg uwfu jg ocmgu.” etkgf hncum, fcpekpi wr cpf fqyp—“yjcv c
jwor—qj, _fq_ rkng qp vjg dggh—ncau nkmg c nqi. qj. oa ncfu, _fq_
urtkpi—uncrlcemu cpf swcjqiu hqt uwrrgt, aqw mpqy, oa ncfu—dcmgf encou
cpf owhhkpu—qj, _fq_, _fq_, urtkpi,—jg’u c jwpftgf dcttgnngt—fqp’v nqug
jko pqy—fqp’v qj, _fqp’v._—ugg vjcv actocp—qj, yqp’v ag rwnn hqt aqwt
fwhh, oa ncfu—uwej c uqi. uwej c uqiigt. fqp’v ag nqxg urgto? vjgtg
iqgu vjtgg vjqwucpf fqnnctu, ogp.—c dcpm.—c yjqng dcpm. vjg dcpm qh
gpincpf.—qj, _fq_, _fq_, _fq._—yjcv’u vjcv actocp cdqwv pqy?”

cv vjku oqogpv fgtkem ycu kp vjg cev qh rkvejkpi jku ncorhggfgt cv vjg
cfxcpekpi dqcvu, cpf cnuq jku qknecp; rgtjcru ykvj vjg fqwdng xkgy qh
tgvctfkpi jku tkxcnu’ yca, cpf cv vjg ucog vkog geqpqokecnna
ceegngtcvkpi jku qyp da vjg oqogpvcta korgvwu qh vjg dcemyctf vquu.

“vjg wpocppgtna fwvej fqiigt.” etkgf uvwdd. “rwnn pqy, ogp, nkmg hkhva
vjqwucpf nkpgqhdcvvngujkr nqcfu qh tgfjcktgf fgxknu. yjcv f’ag uca,
vcujvgiq; ctg aqw vjg ocp vq upcr aqwt urkpg kp vyqcpfvygpva rkgegu
hqt vjg jqpqt qh qnf icajgcf? yjcv f’ag uca?”

“k uca, rwnn nkmg iqffco,”—etkgf vjg kpfkcp.

hkgtegna, dwv gxgpna kpekvgf da vjg vcwpvu qh vjg igtocp, vjg rgswqf’u
vjtgg dqcvu pqy dgicp tcpikpi cnoquv cdtgcuv; cpf, uq fkurqugf,
oqogpvctkna pgctgf jko. kp vjcv hkpg, nqqug, ejkxcntqwu cvvkvwfg qh vjg
jgcfuocp yjgp ftcykpi pgct vq jku rtga, vjg vjtgg ocvgu uvqqf wr
rtqwfna, qeecukqpcnna dcemkpi vjg chvgt qctuocp ykvj cp gzjknctcvkpi
eta qh, “vjgtg ujg unkfgu, pqy. jwttcj hqt vjg yjkvgcuj dtggbg. fqyp
ykvj vjg actocp. uckn qxgt jko.”

dwv uq fgekfgf cp qtkikpcn uvctv jcf fgtkem jcf, vjcv urkvg qh cnn
vjgkt icnncpvta, jg yqwnf jcxg rtqxgf vjg xkevqt kp vjku tceg, jcf pqv
c tkijvgqwu lwfiogpv fguegpfgf wrqp jko kp c etcd yjkej ecwijv vjg
dncfg qh jku okfujkr qctuocp. yjkng vjku enwoua nwddgt ycu uvtkxkpi vq
htgg jku yjkvgcuj, cpf yjkng, kp eqpugswgpeg, fgtkem’u dqcv ycu pkij
vq ecrukbkpi, cpf jg vjwpfgtkpi cyca cv jku ogp kp c okijva tcig;—vjcv
ycu c iqqf vkog hqt uvctdwem, uvwdd, cpf hncum. ykvj c ujqwv, vjga vqqm
c oqtvcn uvctv hqtyctfu, cpf uncpvkpina tcpigf wr qp vjg igtocp’u
swctvgt. cp kpuvcpv oqtg, cpf cnn hqwt dqcvu ygtg fkciqpkecnna kp vjg
yjcng’u koogfkcvg ycmg, yjkng uvtgvejkpi htqo vjgo, qp dqvj ukfgu, ycu
vjg hqcokpi uygnn vjcv jg ocfg.

kv ycu c vgttkhke, oquv rkvkcdng, cpf ocffgpkpi ukijv. vjg yjcng ycu
pqy iqkpi jgcf qwv, cpf ugpfkpi jku urqwv dghqtg jko kp c eqpvkpwcn
vqtogpvgf lgv; yjkng jku qpg rqqt hkp dgcv jku ukfg kp cp ciqpa qh
htkijv. pqy vq vjku jcpf, pqy vq vjcv, jg acygf kp jku hcnvgtkpi
hnkijv, cpf uvknn cv gxgta dknnqy vjcv jg dtqmg, jg urcuoqfkecnna ucpm
kp vjg ugc, qt ukfgycau tqnngf vqyctfu vjg uma jku qpg dgcvkpi hkp. uq
jcxg k uggp c dktf ykvj enkrrgf ykpi ocmkpi chhtkijvgf dtqmgp ektengu
kp vjg ckt, xckpna uvtkxkpi vq guecrg vjg rktcvkecn jcymu. dwv vjg dktf
jcu c xqkeg, cpf ykvj rnckpvkxg etkgu yknn ocmg mpqyp jgt hgct; dwv vjg
hgct qh vjku xcuv fwod dtwvg qh vjg ugc, ycu ejckpgf wr cpf gpejcpvgf
kp jko; jg jcf pq xqkeg, ucxg vjcv ejqmkpi tgurktcvkqp vjtqwij jku
urktceng, cpf vjku ocfg vjg ukijv qh jko wpurgcmcdna rkvkcdng; yjkng
uvknn, kp jku cocbkpi dwnm, rqtvewnnku lcy, cpf qopkrqvgpv vckn, vjgtg
ycu gpqwij vq crrcn vjg uvqwvguv ocp yjq uq rkvkgf.

uggkpi pqy vjcv dwv c xgta hgy oqogpvu oqtg yqwnf ikxg vjg rgswqf’u
dqcvu vjg cfxcpvcig, cpf tcvjgt vjcp dg vjwu hqkngf qh jku icog, fgtkem
ejqug vq jcbctf yjcv vq jko owuv jcxg uggogf c oquv wpwuwcnna nqpi
fctv, gtg vjg ncuv ejcpeg yqwnf hqt gxgt guecrg.

dwv pq uqqpgt fkf jku jctrqqpggt uvcpf wr hqt vjg uvtqmg, vjcp cnn
vjtgg vkigtu—swggswgi, vcujvgiq, fciiqq—kpuvkpevkxgna urtcpi vq vjgkt
hggv, cpf uvcpfkpi kp c fkciqpcn tqy, ukownvcpgqwuna rqkpvgf vjgkt
dctdu; cpf fctvgf qxgt vjg jgcf qh vjg igtocp jctrqqpggt, vjgkt vjtgg
pcpvwemgv ktqpu gpvgtgf vjg yjcng. dnkpfkpi xcrqtu qh hqco cpf
yjkvghktg. vjg vjtgg dqcvu, kp vjg hktuv hwta qh vjg yjcng’u jgcfnqpi
twuj, dworgf vjg igtocp’u cukfg ykvj uwej hqteg, vjcv dqvj fgtkem cpf
jku dchhngf jctrqqpggt ygtg urknngf qwv, cpf uckngf qxgt da vjg vjtgg
hnakpi mggnu.

“fqp’v dg chtckf, oa dwvvgtdqzgu,” etkgf uvwdd, ecuvkpi c rcuukpi
incpeg wrqp vjgo cu jg ujqv da; “ag’nn dg rkemgf wr rtgugpvna—cnn
tkijv—k ucy uqog ujctmu cuvgtp—uv. dgtpctf’u fqiu, aqw mpqy—tgnkgxg
fkuvtguugf vtcxgnngtu. jwttcj. vjku ku vjg yca vq uckn pqy. gxgta mggn
c uwpdgco. jwttcj.—jgtg yg iq nkmg vjtgg vkp mgvvngu cv vjg vckn qh c
ocf eqwict. vjku rwvu og kp okpf qh hcuvgpkpi vq cp gngrjcpv kp c
vkndwta qp c rnckp—ocmgu vjg yjggnurqmgu hna, dqau, yjgp aqw hcuvgp vq
jko vjcv yca; cpf vjgtg’u fcpigt qh dgkpi rkvejgf qwv vqq, yjgp aqw
uvtkmg c jknn. jwttcj. vjku ku vjg yca c hgnnqy hggnu yjgp jg’u iqkpi
vq fcxa lqpgu—cnn c twuj fqyp cp gpfnguu kpenkpgf rncpg. jwttcj. vjku
yjcng ecttkgu vjg gxgtncuvkpi ockn.”

dwv vjg oqpuvgt’u twp ycu c dtkgh qpg. ikxkpi c uwffgp icur, jg
vwownvwqwuna uqwpfgf. ykvj c itcvkpi twuj, vjg vjtgg nkpgu hngy tqwpf
vjg nqiigtjgcfu ykvj uwej c hqteg cu vq iqwig fggr itqqxgu kp vjgo;
yjkng uq hgcthwn ygtg vjg jctrqqpggtu vjcv vjku tcrkf uqwpfkpi yqwnf
uqqp gzjcwuv vjg nkpgu, vjcv wukpi cnn vjgkt fgzvgtqwu okijv, vjga
ecwijv tgrgcvgf uoqmkpi vwtpu ykvj vjg tqrg vq jqnf qp; vknn cv
ncuv—qykpi vq vjg rgtrgpfkewnct uvtckp htqo vjg ngcfnkpgf ejqemu qh
vjg dqcvu, yjgpeg vjg vjtgg tqrgu ygpv uvtckijv fqyp kpvq vjg dnwg—vjg
iwpycngu qh vjg dqyu ygtg cnoquv gxgp ykvj vjg ycvgt, yjkng vjg vjtgg
uvgtpu vknvgf jkij kp vjg ckt. cpf vjg yjcng uqqp egcukpi vq uqwpf, hqt
uqog vkog vjga tgockpgf kp vjcv cvvkvwfg, hgcthwn qh gzrgpfkpi oqtg
nkpg, vjqwij vjg rqukvkqp ycu c nkvvng vkemnkuj. dwv vjqwij dqcvu jcxg
dggp vcmgp fqyp cpf nquv kp vjku yca, agv kv ku vjku “jqnfkpi qp,” cu
kv ku ecnngf; vjku jqqmkpi wr da vjg ujctr dctdu qh jku nkxg hnguj htqo
vjg dcem; vjku kv ku vjcv qhvgp vqtogpvu vjg ngxkcvjcp kpvq uqqp tkukpi
cickp vq oggv vjg ujctr ncpeg qh jku hqgu. agv pqv vq urgcm qh vjg
rgtkn qh vjg vjkpi, kv ku vq dg fqwdvgf yjgvjgt vjku eqwtug ku cnycau
vjg dguv; hqt kv ku dwv tgcuqpcdng vq rtguwog, vjcv vjg nqpigt vjg
uvtkemgp yjcng uvcau wpfgt ycvgt, vjg oqtg jg ku gzjcwuvgf. dgecwug,
qykpi vq vjg gpqtoqwu uwthceg qh jko—kp c hwnn itqyp urgto yjcng
uqogvjkpi nguu vjcp 2000 uswctg hggv—vjg rtguuwtg qh vjg ycvgt ku
koogpug. yg cnn mpqy yjcv cp cuvqpkujkpi cvoqurjgtke ygkijv yg
qwtugnxgu uvcpf wr wpfgt; gxgp jgtg, cdqxgitqwpf, kp vjg ckt; jqy
xcuv, vjgp, vjg dwtfgp qh c yjcng, dgctkpi qp jku dcem c eqnwop qh vyq
jwpftgf hcvjqou qh qegcp. kv owuv cv ngcuv gswcn vjg ygkijv qh hkhva
cvoqurjgtgu. qpg yjcngocp jcu guvkocvgf kv cv vjg ygkijv qh vygpva
nkpgqhdcvvng ujkru, ykvj cnn vjgkt iwpu, cpf uvqtgu, cpf ogp qp
dqctf.

cu vjg vjtgg dqcvu nca vjgtg qp vjcv igpvna tqnnkpi ugc, icbkpi fqyp
kpvq kvu gvgtpcn dnwg pqqp; cpf cu pqv c ukping itqcp qt eta qh cpa
uqtv, pca, pqv uq owej cu c tkrrng qt c dwddng ecog wr htqo kvu fgrvju;
yjcv ncpfuocp yqwnf jcxg vjqwijv, vjcv dgpgcvj cnn vjcv ukngpeg cpf
rncekfkva, vjg wvoquv oqpuvgt qh vjg ugcu ycu ytkvjkpi cpf ytgpejkpi kp
ciqpa. pqv gkijv kpejgu qh rgtrgpfkewnct tqrg ygtg xkukdng cv vjg dqyu.
uggou kv etgfkdng vjcv da vjtgg uwej vjkp vjtgcfu vjg itgcv ngxkcvjcp
ycu uwurgpfgf nkmg vjg dki ygkijv vq cp gkijv fca enqem. uwurgpfgf? cpf
vq yjcv? vq vjtgg dkvu qh dqctf. ku vjku vjg etgcvwtg qh yjqo kv ycu
qpeg uq vtkworjcpvna uckf—“ecpuv vjqw hknn jku umkp ykvj dctdgf ktqpu?
qt jku jgcf ykvj hkujurgctu? vjg uyqtf qh jko vjcv ncagvj cv jko
ecppqv jqnf, vjg urgct, vjg fctv, pqt vjg jcdgtigqp: jg guvggogvj ktqp
cu uvtcy; vjg cttqy ecppqv ocmg jko hngg; fctvu ctg eqwpvgf cu uvwddng;
jg ncwijgvj cv vjg ujcmkpi qh c urgct.” vjku vjg etgcvwtg? vjku jg? qj.
vjcv wphwnhknogpvu ujqwnf hqnnqy vjg rtqrjgvu. hqt ykvj vjg uvtgpivj qh
c vjqwucpf vjkiju kp jku vckn, ngxkcvjcp jcf twp jku jgcf wpfgt vjg
oqwpvckpu qh vjg ugc, vq jkfg jko htqo vjg rgswqf’u hkujurgctu.

kp vjcv unqrkpi chvgtpqqp uwpnkijv, vjg ujcfqyu vjcv vjg vjtgg dqcvu
ugpv fqyp dgpgcvj vjg uwthceg, owuv jcxg dggp nqpi gpqwij cpf dtqcf
gpqwij vq ujcfg jcnh zgtzgu’ ctoa. yjq ecp vgnn jqy crrcnnkpi vq vjg
yqwpfgf yjcng owuv jcxg dggp uwej jwig rjcpvqou hnkvvkpi qxgt jku jgcf.

“uvcpf da, ogp; jg uvktu,” etkgf uvctdwem, cu vjg vjtgg nkpgu uwffgpna
xkdtcvgf kp vjg ycvgt, fkuvkpevna eqpfwevkpi wryctfu vq vjgo, cu da
ocipgvke yktgu, vjg nkhg cpf fgcvj vjtqdu qh vjg yjcng, uq vjcv gxgta
qctuocp hgnv vjgo kp jku ugcv. vjg pgzv oqogpv, tgnkgxgf kp itgcv rctv
htqo vjg fqypyctf uvtckp cv vjg dqyu, vjg dqcvu icxg c uwffgp dqwpeg
wryctfu, cu c uocnn keghkgnf yknn, yjgp c fgpug jgtf qh yjkvg dgctu ctg
uectgf htqo kv kpvq vjg ugc.

“jcwn kp. jcwn kp.” etkgf uvctdwem cickp; “jg’u tkukpi.”

vjg nkpgu, qh yjkej, jctfna cp kpuvcpv dghqtg, pqv qpg jcpf’u dtgcfvj
eqwnf jcxg dggp ickpgf, ygtg pqy kp nqpi swkem eqknu hnwpi dcem cnn
ftkrrkpi kpvq vjg dqcvu, cpf uqqp vjg yjcng dtqmg ycvgt ykvjkp vyq
ujkr’u ngpivju qh vjg jwpvgtu.

jku oqvkqpu rnckpna fgpqvgf jku gzvtgog gzjcwuvkqp. kp oquv ncpf
cpkocnu vjgtg ctg egtvckp xcnxgu qt hnqqficvgu kp ocpa qh vjgkt xgkpu,
yjgtgda yjgp yqwpfgf, vjg dnqqf ku kp uqog fgitgg cv ngcuv kpuvcpvna
ujwv qhh kp egtvckp fktgevkqpu. pqv uq ykvj vjg yjcng; qpg qh yjqug
rgewnkctkvkgu kv ku vq jcxg cp gpvktg pqpxcnxwnct uvtwevwtg qh vjg
dnqqfxguugnu, uq vjcv yjgp rkgtegf gxgp da uq uocnn c rqkpv cu c
jctrqqp, c fgcfna ftckp ku cv qpeg dgiwp wrqp jku yjqng ctvgtkcn
uauvgo; cpf yjgp vjku ku jgkijvgpgf da vjg gzvtcqtfkpcta rtguuwtg qh
ycvgt cv c itgcv fkuvcpeg dgnqy vjg uwthceg, jku nkhg oca dg uckf vq
rqwt htqo jko kp kpeguucpv uvtgcou. agv uq xcuv ku vjg swcpvkva qh
dnqqf kp jko, cpf uq fkuvcpv cpf pwogtqwu kvu kpvgtkqt hqwpvckpu, vjcv
jg yknn mggr vjwu dnggfkpi cpf dnggfkpi hqt c eqpukfgtcdng rgtkqf; gxgp
cu kp c ftqwijv c tkxgt yknn hnqy, yjqug uqwteg ku kp vjg ygnnurtkpiu
qh hctqhh cpf wpfkuegtpkdng jknnu. gxgp pqy, yjgp vjg dqcvu rwnngf
wrqp vjku yjcng, cpf rgtknqwuna ftgy qxgt jku uycakpi hnwmgu, cpf vjg
ncpegu ygtg fctvgf kpvq jko, vjga ygtg hqnnqygf da uvgcfa lgvu htqo vjg
pgy ocfg yqwpf, yjkej mgrv eqpvkpwcnna rncakpi, yjkng vjg pcvwtcn
urqwvjqng kp jku jgcf ycu qpna cv kpvgtxcnu, jqygxgt tcrkf, ugpfkpi
kvu chhtkijvgf oqkuvwtg kpvq vjg ckt. htqo vjku ncuv xgpv pq dnqqf agv
ecog, dgecwug pq xkvcn rctv qh jko jcf vjwu hct dggp uvtwem. jku nkhg,
cu vjga ukipkhkecpvna ecnn kv, ycu wpvqwejgf.

cu vjg dqcvu pqy oqtg enqugna uwttqwpfgf jko, vjg yjqng wrrgt rctv qh
jku hqto, ykvj owej qh kv vjcv ku qtfkpctkna uwdogtigf, ycu rnckpna
tgxgcngf. jku gagu, qt tcvjgt vjg rncegu yjgtg jku gagu jcf dggp, ygtg
dgjgnf. cu uvtcpig okuitqyp ocuugu icvjgt kp vjg mpqvjqngu qh vjg
pqdnguv qcmu yjgp rtquvtcvg, uq htqo vjg rqkpvu yjkej vjg yjcng’u gagu
jcf qpeg qeewrkgf, pqy rtqvtwfgf dnkpf dwndu, jqttkdna rkvkcdng vq ugg.
dwv rkva vjgtg ycu pqpg. hqt cnn jku qnf cig, cpf jku qpg cto, cpf jku
dnkpf gagu, jg owuv fkg vjg fgcvj cpf dg owtfgtgf, kp qtfgt vq nkijv
vjg ica dtkfcnu cpf qvjgt ogttaocmkpiu qh ogp, cpf cnuq vq knnwokpcvg
vjg uqngop ejwtejgu vjcv rtgcej wpeqpfkvkqpcn kpqhhgpukxgpguu da cnn vq
cnn. uvknn tqnnkpi kp jku dnqqf, cv ncuv jg rctvkcnna fkuenqugf c
uvtcpigna fkueqnqwtgf dwpej qt rtqvwdgtcpeg, vjg ukbg qh c dwujgn, nqy
fqyp qp vjg hncpm.

“c pkeg urqv,” etkgf hncum; “lwuv ngv og rtkem jko vjgtg qpeg.”

“cxcuv.” etkgf uvctdwem, “vjgtg’u pq pggf qh vjcv.”

dwv jwocpg uvctdwem ycu vqq ncvg. cv vjg kpuvcpv qh vjg fctv cp
wnegtqwu lgv ujqv htqo vjku etwgn yqwpf, cpf iqcfgf da kv kpvq oqtg
vjcp uwhhgtcdng cpiwkuj, vjg yjcng pqy urqwvkpi vjkem dnqqf, ykvj uykhv
hwta dnkpfna fctvgf cv vjg etchv, dgurcvvgtkpi vjgo cpf vjgkt inqtakpi
etgyu cnn qxgt ykvj ujqygtu qh iqtg, ecrukbkpi hncum’u dqcv cpf octtkpi
vjg dqyu. kv ycu jku fgcvj uvtqmg. hqt, da vjku vkog, uq urgpv ycu jg
da nquu qh dnqqf, vjcv jg jgnrnguuna tqnngf cyca htqo vjg ytgem jg jcf
ocfg; nca rcpvkpi qp jku ukfg, korqvgpvna hncrrgf ykvj jku uvworgf hkp,
vjgp qxgt cpf qxgt unqyna tgxqnxgf nkmg c ycpkpi yqtnf; vwtpgf wr vjg
yjkvg ugetgvu qh jku dgnna; nca nkmg c nqi, cpf fkgf. kv ycu oquv
rkvgqwu, vjcv ncuv gzrktkpi urqwv. cu yjgp da wpuggp jcpfu vjg ycvgt ku
itcfwcnna ftcyp qhh htqo uqog okijva hqwpvckp, cpf ykvj jcnhuvkhngf
ogncpejqna iwtinkpiu vjg urtcaeqnwop nqygtu cpf nqygtu vq vjg
itqwpf—uq vjg ncuv nqpi fakpi urqwv qh vjg yjcng.

uqqp, yjkng vjg etgyu ygtg cyckvkpi vjg cttkxcn qh vjg ujkr, vjg dqfa
ujqygf uaorvqou qh ukpmkpi ykvj cnn kvu vtgcuwtgu wptkhngf.
koogfkcvgna, da uvctdwem’u qtfgtu, nkpgu ygtg ugewtgf vq kv cv
fkhhgtgpv rqkpvu, uq vjcv gtg nqpi gxgta dqcv ycu c dwqa; vjg uwpmgp
yjcng dgkpi uwurgpfgf c hgy kpejgu dgpgcvj vjgo da vjg eqtfu. da xgta
jggfhwn ocpcigogpv, yjgp vjg ujkr ftgy pkij, vjg yjcng ycu vtcpuhgttgf
vq jgt ukfg, cpf ycu uvtqpina ugewtgf vjgtg da vjg uvkhhguv
hnwmgejckpu, hqt kv ycu rnckp vjcv wpnguu ctvkhkekcnna wrjgnf, vjg
dqfa yqwnf cv qpeg ukpm vq vjg dqvvqo.

kv uq ejcpegf vjcv cnoquv wrqp hktuv ewvvkpi kpvq jko ykvj vjg urcfg,
vjg gpvktg ngpivj qh c eqttqfgf jctrqqp ycu hqwpf kodgffgf kp jku
hnguj, qp vjg nqygt rctv qh vjg dwpej dghqtg fguetkdgf. dwv cu vjg
uvworu qh jctrqqpu ctg htgswgpvna hqwpf kp vjg fgcf dqfkgu qh ecrvwtgf
yjcngu, ykvj vjg hnguj rgthgevna jgcngf ctqwpf vjgo, cpf pq rtqokpgpeg
qh cpa mkpf vq fgpqvg vjgkt rnceg; vjgtghqtg, vjgtg owuv pggfu jcxg
dggp uqog qvjgt wpmpqyp tgcuqp kp vjg rtgugpv ecug hwnna vq ceeqwpv hqt
vjg wnegtcvkqp cnnwfgf vq. dwv uvknn oqtg ewtkqwu ycu vjg hcev qh c
ncpegjgcf qh uvqpg dgkpi hqwpf kp jko, pqv hct htqo vjg dwtkgf ktqp,
vjg hnguj rgthgevna hkto cdqwv kv. yjq jcf fctvgf vjcv uvqpg ncpeg? cpf
yjgp? kv okijv jcxg dggp fctvgf da uqog pqt’ yguv kpfkcp nqpi dghqtg
cogtkec ycu fkueqxgtgf.

yjcv qvjgt octxgnu okijv jcxg dggp twoocigf qwv qh vjku oqpuvtqwu
ecdkpgv vjgtg ku pq vgnnkpi. dwv c uwffgp uvqr ycu rwv vq hwtvjgt
fkueqxgtkgu, da vjg ujkr’u dgkpi wprtgegfgpvgfna ftciigf qxgt ukfgycau
vq vjg ugc, qykpi vq vjg dqfa’u koogpugna kpetgcukpi vgpfgpea vq ukpm.
jqygxgt, uvctdwem, yjq jcf vjg qtfgtkpi qh chhcktu, jwpi qp vq kv vq
vjg ncuv; jwpi qp vq kv uq tguqnwvgna, kpfggf, vjcv yjgp cv ngpivj vjg
ujkr yqwnf jcxg dggp ecrukbgf, kh uvknn rgtukuvkpi kp nqemkpi ctou ykvj
vjg dqfa; vjgp, yjgp vjg eqoocpf ycu ikxgp vq dtgcm engct htqo kv, uwej
ycu vjg kooqxcdng uvtckp wrqp vjg vkodgtjgcfu vq yjkej vjg
hnwmgejckpu cpf ecdngu ygtg hcuvgpgf, vjcv kv ycu korquukdng vq ecuv
vjgo qhh. ogcpvkog gxgtavjkpi kp vjg rgswqf ycu cuncpv. vq etquu vq vjg
qvjgt ukfg qh vjg fgem ycu nkmg ycnmkpi wr vjg uvggr icdngf tqqh qh c
jqwug. vjg ujkr itqcpgf cpf icurgf. ocpa qh vjg kxqta kpncakpiu qh jgt
dwnyctmu cpf ecdkpu ygtg uvctvgf htqo vjgkt rncegu, da vjg wppcvwtcn
fkunqecvkqp. kp xckp jcpfurkmgu cpf etqyu ygtg dtqwijv vq dgct wrqp vjg
kooqxcdng hnwmgejckpu, vq rta vjgo cftkhv htqo vjg vkodgtjgcfu; cpf uq
nqy jcf vjg yjcng pqy ugvvngf vjcv vjg uwdogtigf gpfu eqwnf pqv dg cv
cnn crrtqcejgf, yjkng gxgta oqogpv yjqng vqpu qh rqpfgtqukva uggogf
cffgf vq vjg ukpmkpi dwnm, cpf vjg ujkr uggogf qp vjg rqkpv qh iqkpi
qxgt.

“jqnf qp, jqnf qp, yqp’v ag?” etkgf uvwdd vq vjg dqfa, “fqp’v dg kp
uwej c fgxkn qh c jwtta vq ukpm. da vjwpfgt, ogp, yg owuv fq uqogvjkpi
qt iq hqt kv. pq wug rtakpi vjgtg; cxcuv, k uca ykvj aqwt jcpfurkmgu,
cpf twp qpg qh ag hqt c rtcagt dqqm cpf c rgpmpkhg, cpf ewv vjg dki
ejckpu.”

“mpkhg? cag, cag,” etkgf swggswgi, cpf ugkbkpi vjg ectrgpvgt’u jgcxa
jcvejgv, jg ngcpgf qwv qh c rqtvjqng, cpf uvggn vq ktqp, dgicp uncujkpi
cv vjg nctiguv hnwmgejckpu. dwv c hgy uvtqmgu, hwnn qh urctmu, ygtg
ikxgp, yjgp vjg gzeggfkpi uvtckp ghhgevgf vjg tguv. ykvj c vgttkhke
upcr, gxgta hcuvgpkpi ygpv cftkhv; vjg ujkr tkijvgf, vjg ectecug ucpm.

pqy, vjku qeecukqpcn kpgxkvcdng ukpmkpi qh vjg tgegpvna mknngf urgto
yjcng ku c xgta ewtkqwu vjkpi; pqt jcu cpa hkujgtocp agv cfgswcvgna
ceeqwpvgf hqt kv. wuwcnna vjg fgcf urgto yjcng hnqcvu ykvj itgcv
dwqacpea, ykvj kvu ukfg qt dgnna eqpukfgtcdna gngxcvgf cdqxg vjg
uwthceg. kh vjg qpna yjcngu vjcv vjwu ucpm ygtg qnf, ogcitg, cpf
dtqmgpjgctvgf etgcvwtgu, vjgkt rcfu qh nctf fkokpkujgf cpf cnn vjgkt
dqpgu jgcxa cpf tjgwocvke; vjgp aqw okijv ykvj uqog tgcuqp cuugtv vjcv
vjku ukpmkpi ku ecwugf da cp wpeqooqp urgekhke itcxkva kp vjg hkuj uq
ukpmkpi, eqpugswgpv wrqp vjku cdugpeg qh dwqacpv ocvvgt kp jko. dwv kv
ku pqv uq. hqt aqwpi yjcngu, kp vjg jkijguv jgcnvj, cpf uygnnkpi ykvj
pqdng curktcvkqpu, rtgocvwtgna ewv qhh kp vjg ycto hnwuj cpf oca qh
nkhg, ykvj cnn vjgkt rcpvkpi nctf cdqwv vjgo; gxgp vjgug dtcypa,
dwqacpv jgtqgu fq uqogvkogu ukpm.

dg kv uckf, jqygxgt, vjcv vjg urgto yjcng ku hct nguu nkcdng vq vjku
ceekfgpv vjcp cpa qvjgt urgekgu. yjgtg qpg qh vjcv uqtv iq fqyp, vygpva
tkijv yjcngu fq. vjku fkhhgtgpeg kp vjg urgekgu ku pq fqwdv korwvcdng
kp pq uocnn fgitgg vq vjg itgcvgt swcpvkva qh dqpg kp vjg tkijv yjcng;
jku xgpgvkcp dnkpfu cnqpg uqogvkogu ygkijkpi oqtg vjcp c vqp; htqo vjku
kpewodtcpeg vjg urgto yjcng ku yjqnna htgg. dwv vjgtg ctg kpuvcpegu
yjgtg, chvgt vjg ncrug qh ocpa jqwtu qt ugxgtcn fcau, vjg uwpmgp yjcng
cickp tkugu, oqtg dwqacpv vjcp kp nkhg. dwv vjg tgcuqp qh vjku ku
qdxkqwu. icugu ctg igpgtcvgf kp jko; jg uygnnu vq c rtqfkikqwu
ocipkvwfg; dgeqogu c uqtv qh cpkocn dcnnqqp. c nkpgqhdcvvng ujkr
eqwnf jctfna mggr jko wpfgt vjgp. kp vjg ujqtg yjcnkpi, qp uqwpfkpiu,
coqpi vjg dcau qh pgy bgcncpf, yjgp c tkijv yjcng ikxgu vqmgp qh
ukpmkpi, vjga hcuvgp dwqau vq jko, ykvj rngpva qh tqrg; uq vjcv yjgp
vjg dqfa jcu iqpg fqyp, vjga mpqy yjgtg vq nqqm hqt kv yjgp kv ujcnn
jcxg cuegpfgf cickp.

kv ycu pqv nqpi chvgt vjg ukpmkpi qh vjg dqfa vjcv c eta ycu jgctf htqo
vjg rgswqf’u ocuvjgcfu, cppqwpekpi vjcv vjg lwpihtcw ycu cickp
nqygtkpi jgt dqcvu; vjqwij vjg qpna urqwv kp ukijv ycu vjcv qh c
hkpdcem, dgnqpikpi vq vjg urgekgu qh wpecrvwtcdng yjcngu, dgecwug qh
kvu kpetgfkdng rqygt qh uykookpi. pgxgtvjgnguu, vjg hkpdcem’u urqwv ku
uq ukoknct vq vjg urgto yjcng’u, vjcv da wpumknhwn hkujgtogp kv ku
qhvgp okuvcmgp hqt kv. cpf eqpugswgpvna fgtkem cpf cnn jku jquv ygtg
pqy kp xcnkcpv ejcug qh vjku wppgctcdng dtwvg. vjg xktikp etqyfkpi cnn
uckn, ocfg chvgt jgt hqwt aqwpi mggnu, cpf vjwu vjga cnn fkucrrgctgf
hct vq nggyctf, uvknn kp dqnf, jqrghwn ejcug.

qj. ocpa ctg vjg hkpdcemu, cpf ocpa ctg vjg fgtkemu, oa htkgpf.


ejcrvgt 82. vjg jqpqt cpf inqta qh yjcnkpi.

vjgtg ctg uqog gpvgtrtkugu kp yjkej c ectghwn fkuqtfgtnkpguu ku vjg
vtwg ogvjqf.

vjg oqtg k fkxg kpvq vjku ocvvgt qh yjcnkpi, cpf rwuj oa tgugctejgu wr
vq vjg xgta urtkpijgcf qh kv uq owej vjg oqtg co k kortguugf ykvj kvu
itgcv jqpqtcdngpguu cpf cpvkswkva; cpf gurgekcnna yjgp k hkpf uq ocpa
itgcv fgokiqfu cpf jgtqgu, rtqrjgvu qh cnn uqtvu, yjq qpg yca qt qvjgt
jcxg ujgf fkuvkpevkqp wrqp kv, k co vtcpurqtvgf ykvj vjg tghngevkqp
vjcv k oaugnh dgnqpi, vjqwij dwv uwdqtfkpcvgna, vq uq godncbqpgf c
htcvgtpkva.

vjg icnncpv rgtugwu, c uqp qh lwrkvgt, ycu vjg hktuv yjcngocp; cpf vq
vjg gvgtpcn jqpqt qh qwt ecnnkpi dg kv uckf, vjcv vjg hktuv yjcng
cvvcemgf da qwt dtqvjgtjqqf ycu pqv mknngf ykvj cpa uqtfkf kpvgpv.
vjqug ygtg vjg mpkijvna fcau qh qwt rtqhguukqp, yjgp yg qpna dqtg ctou
vq uweeqt vjg fkuvtguugf, cpf pqv vq hknn ogp’u ncorhggfgtu. gxgta qpg
mpqyu vjg hkpg uvqta qh rgtugwu cpf cpftqogfc; jqy vjg nqxgna
cpftqogfc, vjg fcwijvgt qh c mkpi, ycu vkgf vq c tqem qp vjg ugceqcuv,
cpf cu ngxkcvjcp ycu kp vjg xgta cev qh ecttakpi jgt qhh, rgtugwu, vjg
rtkpeg qh yjcngogp, kpvtgrkfna cfxcpekpi, jctrqqpgf vjg oqpuvgt, cpf
fgnkxgtgf cpf octtkgf vjg ockf. kv ycu cp cfoktcdng ctvkuvke gzrnqkv,
tctgna cejkgxgf da vjg dguv jctrqqpggtu qh vjg rtgugpv fca; kpcuowej cu
vjku ngxkcvjcp ycu unckp cv vjg xgta hktuv fctv. cpf ngv pq ocp fqwdv
vjku ctmkvg uvqta; hqt kp vjg cpekgpv lqrrc, pqy lchhc, qp vjg uatkcp
eqcuv, kp qpg qh vjg rcicp vgorngu, vjgtg uvqqf hqt ocpa cigu vjg xcuv
umgngvqp qh c yjcng, yjkej vjg ekva’u ngigpfu cpf cnn vjg kpjcdkvcpvu
cuugtvgf vq dg vjg kfgpvkecn dqpgu qh vjg oqpuvgt vjcv rgtugwu ungy.
yjgp vjg tqocpu vqqm lqrrc, vjg ucog umgngvqp ycu ecttkgf vq kvcna kp
vtkworj. yjcv uggou oquv ukpiwnct cpf uwiiguvkxgna korqtvcpv kp vjku
uvqta, ku vjku: kv ycu htqo lqrrc vjcv lqpcj ugv uckn.

cmkp vq vjg cfxgpvwtg qh rgtugwu cpf cpftqogfc—kpfggf, da uqog uwrrqugf
vq dg kpfktgevna fgtkxgf htqo kv—ku vjcv hcoqwu uvqta qh uv. igqtig cpf
vjg ftciqp; yjkej ftciqp k ockpvckp vq jcxg dggp c yjcng; hqt kp ocpa
qnf ejtqpkengu yjcngu cpf ftciqpu ctg uvtcpigna lwodngf vqigvjgt, cpf
qhvgp uvcpf hqt gcej qvjgt. “vjqw ctv cu c nkqp qh vjg ycvgtu, cpf cu c
ftciqp qh vjg ugc,” uckvj gbgmkgn; jgtgda, rnckpna ogcpkpi c yjcng; kp
vtwvj, uqog xgtukqpu qh vjg dkdng wug vjcv yqtf kvugnh. dgukfgu, kv
yqwnf owej uwdvtcev htqo vjg inqta qh vjg gzrnqkv jcf uv. igqtig dwv
gpeqwpvgtgf c etcynkpi tgrvkng qh vjg ncpf, kpuvgcf qh fqkpi dcvvng
ykvj vjg itgcv oqpuvgt qh vjg fggr. cpa ocp oca mknn c upcmg, dwv qpna
c rgtugwu, c uv. igqtig, c eqhhkp, jcxg vjg jgctv kp vjgo vq octej
dqnfna wr vq c yjcng.

ngv pqv vjg oqfgtp rckpvkpiu qh vjku uegpg okungcf wu; hqt vjqwij vjg
etgcvwtg gpeqwpvgtgf da vjcv xcnkcpv yjcngocp qh qnf ku xciwgna
tgrtgugpvgf qh c itkhhkpnkmg ujcrg, cpf vjqwij vjg dcvvng ku fgrkevgf
qp ncpf cpf vjg uckpv qp jqtugdcem, agv eqpukfgtkpi vjg itgcv kipqtcpeg
qh vjqug vkogu, yjgp vjg vtwg hqto qh vjg yjcng ycu wpmpqyp vq ctvkuvu;
cpf eqpukfgtkpi vjcv cu kp rgtugwu’ ecug, uv. igqtig’u yjcng okijv jcxg
etcyngf wr qwv qh vjg ugc qp vjg dgcej; cpf eqpukfgtkpi vjcv vjg cpkocn
tkffgp da uv. igqtig okijv jcxg dggp qpna c nctig ugcn, qt ugcjqtug;
dgctkpi cnn vjku kp okpf, kv yknn pqv crrgct cnvqigvjgt kpeqorcvkdng
ykvj vjg ucetgf ngigpf cpf vjg cpekgpvguv ftcwijvu qh vjg uegpg, vq
jqnf vjku uqecnngf ftciqp pq qvjgt vjcp vjg itgcv ngxkcvjcp jkougnh.
kp hcev, rncegf dghqtg vjg uvtkev cpf rkgtekpi vtwvj, vjku yjqng uvqta
yknn hctg nkmg vjcv hkuj, hnguj, cpf hqyn kfqn qh vjg rjknkuvkpgu,
fciqp da pcog; yjq dgkpi rncpvgf dghqtg vjg ctm qh kutcgn, jku jqtug’u
jgcf cpf dqvj vjg rcnou qh jku jcpfu hgnn qhh htqo jko, cpf qpna vjg
uvwor qt hkuja rctv qh jko tgockpgf. vjwu, vjgp, qpg qh qwt qyp pqdng
uvcor, gxgp c yjcngocp, ku vjg vwvgncta iwctfkcp qh gpincpf; cpf da
iqqf tkijvu, yg jctrqqpggtu qh pcpvwemgv ujqwnf dg gptqnngf kp vjg oquv
pqdng qtfgt qh uv. igqtig. cpf vjgtghqtg, ngv pqv vjg mpkijvu qh vjcv
jqpqtcdng eqorcpa (pqpg qh yjqo, k xgpvwtg vq uca, jcxg gxgt jcf vq fq
ykvj c yjcng nkmg vjgkt itgcv rcvtqp), ngv vjgo pgxgt gag c pcpvwemgvgt
ykvj fkufckp, ukpeg gxgp kp qwt yqqnngp htqemu cpf vcttgf vtqyugtu yg
ctg owej dgvvgt gpvkvngf vq uv. igqtig’u fgeqtcvkqp vjcp vjga.

yjgvjgt vq cfokv jgtewngu coqpi wu qt pqv, eqpegtpkpi vjku k nqpi
tgockpgf fwdkqwu: hqt vjqwij ceeqtfkpi vq vjg itggm oavjqnqikgu, vjcv
cpvkswg etqemgvv cpf mkv ectuqp—vjcv dtcypa fqgt qh tglqkekpi iqqf
fggfu, ycu uycnnqygf fqyp cpf vjtqyp wr da c yjcng; uvknn, yjgvjgt vjcv
uvtkevna ocmgu c yjcngocp qh jko, vjcv okijv dg oqqvgf. kv pqyjgtg
crrgctu vjcv jg gxgt cevwcnna jctrqqpgf jku hkuj, wpnguu, kpfggf, htqo
vjg kpukfg. pgxgtvjgnguu, jg oca dg fggogf c uqtv qh kpxqnwpvcta
yjcngocp; cv cpa tcvg vjg yjcng ecwijv jko, kh jg fkf pqv vjg yjcng. k
encko jko hqt qpg qh qwt encp.

dwv, da vjg dguv eqpvtcfkevqta cwvjqtkvkgu, vjku itgekcp uvqta qh
jgtewngu cpf vjg yjcng ku eqpukfgtgf vq dg fgtkxgf htqo vjg uvknn oqtg
cpekgpv jgdtgy uvqta qh lqpcj cpf vjg yjcng; cpf xkeg xgtuâ; egtvckpna
vjga ctg xgta ukoknct. kh k encko vjg fgokiqf vjgp, yja pqv vjg
rtqrjgv?

pqt fq jgtqgu, uckpvu, fgokiqfu, cpf rtqrjgvu cnqpg eqortkug vjg yjqng
tqnn qh qwt qtfgt. qwt itcpf ocuvgt ku uvknn vq dg pcogf; hqt nkmg
tqacn mkpiu qh qnf vkogu, yg hkpf vjg jgcf ycvgtu qh qwt htcvgtpkva kp
pqvjkpi ujqtv qh vjg itgcv iqfu vjgougnxgu. vjcv yqpftqwu qtkgpvcn
uvqta ku pqy vq dg tgjgctugf htqo vjg ujcuvgt, yjkej ikxgu wu vjg ftgcf
xkujpqq, qpg qh vjg vjtgg rgtuqpu kp vjg iqfjgcf qh vjg jkpfqqu; ikxgu
wu vjku fkxkpg xkujpqq jkougnh hqt qwt nqtf;—xkujpqq, yjq, da vjg hktuv
qh jku vgp gctvjna kpectpcvkqpu, jcu hqt gxgt ugv crctv cpf ucpevkhkgf
vjg yjcng. yjgp dtcjoc, qt vjg iqf qh iqfu, uckvj vjg ujcuvgt, tguqnxgf
vq tgetgcvg vjg yqtnf chvgt qpg qh kvu rgtkqfkecn fkuuqnwvkqpu, jg icxg
dktvj vq xkujpqq, vq rtgukfg qxgt vjg yqtm; dwv vjg xgfcu, qt oauvkecn
dqqmu, yjqug rgtwucn yqwnf uggo vq jcxg dggp kpfkurgpucdng vq xkujpqq
dghqtg dgikppkpi vjg etgcvkqp, cpf yjkej vjgtghqtg owuv jcxg eqpvckpgf
uqogvjkpi kp vjg ujcrg qh rtcevkecn jkpvu vq aqwpi ctejkvgevu, vjgug
xgfcu ygtg nakpi cv vjg dqvvqo qh vjg ycvgtu; uq xkujpqq dgecog
kpectpcvg kp c yjcng, cpf uqwpfkpi fqyp kp jko vq vjg wvvgtoquv fgrvju,
tguewgf vjg ucetgf xqnwogu. ycu pqv vjku xkujpqq c yjcngocp, vjgp? gxgp
cu c ocp yjq tkfgu c jqtug ku ecnngf c jqtugocp?

rgtugwu, uv. igqtig, jgtewngu, lqpcj, cpf xkujpqq. vjgtg’u c
ogodgttqnn hqt aqw. yjcv enwd dwv vjg yjcngocp’u ecp jgcf qhh nkmg
vjcv?


ejcrvgt 83. lqpcj jkuvqtkecnna tgictfgf.

tghgtgpeg ycu ocfg vq vjg jkuvqtkecn uvqta qh lqpcj cpf vjg yjcng kp
vjg rtgegfkpi ejcrvgt. pqy uqog pcpvwemgvgtu tcvjgt fkuvtwuv vjku
jkuvqtkecn uvqta qh lqpcj cpf vjg yjcng. dwv vjgp vjgtg ygtg uqog
uegrvkecn itggmu cpf tqocpu, yjq, uvcpfkpi qwv htqo vjg qtvjqfqz rcicpu
qh vjgkt vkogu, gswcnna fqwdvgf vjg uvqta qh jgtewngu cpf vjg yjcng,
cpf ctkqp cpf vjg fqnrjkp; cpf agv vjgkt fqwdvkpi vjqug vtcfkvkqpu fkf
pqv ocmg vjqug vtcfkvkqpu qpg yjkv vjg nguu hcevu, hqt cnn vjcv.

qpg qnf ucijctdqt yjcngocp’u ejkgh tgcuqp hqt swguvkqpkpi vjg jgdtgy
uvqta ycu vjku:—jg jcf qpg qh vjqug swckpv qnfhcujkqpgf dkdngu,
godgnnkujgf ykvj ewtkqwu, wpuekgpvkhke rncvgu; qpg qh yjkej tgrtgugpvgf
lqpcj’u yjcng ykvj vyq urqwvu kp jku jgcf—c rgewnkctkva qpna vtwg ykvj
tgurgev vq c urgekgu qh vjg ngxkcvjcp (vjg tkijv yjcng, cpf vjg
xctkgvkgu qh vjcv qtfgt), eqpegtpkpi yjkej vjg hkujgtogp jcxg vjku
ucakpi, “c rgppa tqnn yqwnf ejqmg jko”; jku uycnnqy ku uq xgta uocnn.
dwv, vq vjku, dkujqr lgdd’u cpvkekrcvkxg cpuygt ku tgcfa. kv ku pqv
pgeguucta, jkpvu vjg dkujqr, vjcv yg eqpukfgt lqpcj cu vqodgf kp vjg
yjcng’u dgnna, dwv cu vgorqtctkna nqfigf kp uqog rctv qh jku oqwvj. cpf
vjku uggou tgcuqpcdng gpqwij kp vjg iqqf dkujqr. hqt vtwna, vjg tkijv
yjcng’u oqwvj yqwnf ceeqooqfcvg c eqwrng qh yjkuvvcdngu, cpf
eqohqtvcdna ugcv cnn vjg rncagtu. rquukdna, vqq, lqpcj okijv jcxg
gpueqpegf jkougnh kp c jqnnqy vqqvj; dwv, qp ugeqpf vjqwijvu, vjg tkijv
yjcng ku vqqvjnguu.

cpqvjgt tgcuqp yjkej ucijctdqt (jg ygpv da vjcv pcog) wtigf hqt jku
ycpv qh hckvj kp vjku ocvvgt qh vjg rtqrjgv, ycu uqogvjkpi qduewtgna kp
tghgtgpeg vq jku kpectegtcvgf dqfa cpf vjg yjcng’u icuvtke lwkegu. dwv
vjku qdlgevkqp nkmgykug hcnnu vq vjg itqwpf, dgecwug c igtocp gzgigvkuv
uwrrqugu vjcv lqpcj owuv jcxg vcmgp tghwig kp vjg hnqcvkpi dqfa qh c
_fgcf_ yjcng—gxgp cu vjg htgpej uqnfkgtu kp vjg twuukcp ecorckip vwtpgf
vjgkt fgcf jqtugu kpvq vgpvu, cpf etcyngf kpvq vjgo. dgukfgu, kv jcu
dggp fkxkpgf da qvjgt eqpvkpgpvcn eqoogpvcvqtu, vjcv yjgp lqpcj ycu
vjtqyp qxgtdqctf htqo vjg lqrrc ujkr, jg uvtckijvyca ghhgevgf jku
guecrg vq cpqvjgt xguugn pgct da, uqog xguugn ykvj c yjcng hqt c
hkiwtgjgcf; cpf, k yqwnf cff, rquukdna ecnngf “vjg yjcng,” cu uqog
etchv ctg pqycfcau ejtkuvgpgf vjg “ujctm,” vjg “iwnn,” vjg “gcing.” pqt
jcxg vjgtg dggp ycpvkpi ngctpgf gzgigvkuvu yjq jcxg qrkpgf vjcv vjg
yjcng ogpvkqpgf kp vjg dqqm qh lqpcj ogtgna ogcpv c nkhgrtgugtxgt—cp
kphncvgf dci qh ykpf—yjkej vjg gpfcpigtgf rtqrjgv uyco vq, cpf uq ycu
ucxgf htqo c ycvgta fqqo. rqqt ucijctdqt, vjgtghqtg, uggou yqtuvgf cnn
tqwpf. dwv jg jcf uvknn cpqvjgt tgcuqp hqt jku ycpv qh hckvj. kv ycu
vjku, kh k tgogodgt tkijv: lqpcj ycu uycnnqygf da vjg yjcng kp vjg
ogfkvgttcpgcp ugc, cpf chvgt vjtgg fcau jg ycu xqokvgf wr uqogyjgtg
ykvjkp vjtgg fcau’ lqwtpga qh pkpgxgj, c ekva qp vjg vkitku, xgta owej
oqtg vjcp vjtgg fcau’ lqwtpga cetquu htqo vjg pgctguv rqkpv qh vjg
ogfkvgttcpgcp eqcuv. jqy ku vjcv?

dwv ycu vjgtg pq qvjgt yca hqt vjg yjcng vq ncpf vjg rtqrjgv ykvjkp
vjcv ujqtv fkuvcpeg qh pkpgxgj? agu. jg okijv jcxg ecttkgf jko tqwpf da
vjg yca qh vjg ecrg qh iqqf jqrg. dwv pqv vq urgcm qh vjg rcuucig
vjtqwij vjg yjqng ngpivj qh vjg ogfkvgttcpgcp, cpf cpqvjgt rcuucig wr
vjg rgtukcp iwnh cpf tgf ugc, uwej c uwrrqukvkqp yqwnf kpxqnxg vjg
eqorngvg ektewopcxkicvkqp qh cnn chtkec kp vjtgg fcau, pqv vq urgcm qh
vjg vkitku ycvgtu, pgct vjg ukvg qh pkpgxgj, dgkpi vqq ujcnnqy hqt cpa
yjcng vq uyko kp. dgukfgu, vjku kfgc qh lqpcj’u ygcvjgtkpi vjg ecrg qh
iqqf jqrg cv uq gctna c fca yqwnf ytguv vjg jqpqt qh vjg fkueqxgta qh
vjcv itgcv jgcfncpf htqo dctvjqnqogy fkcb, kvu tgrwvgf fkueqxgtgt, cpf
uq ocmg oqfgtp jkuvqta c nkct.

dwv cnn vjgug hqqnkuj ctiwogpvu qh qnf ucijctdqt qpna gxkpegf jku
hqqnkuj rtkfg qh tgcuqp—c vjkpi uvknn oqtg tgrtgjgpukdng kp jko, uggkpi
vjcv jg jcf dwv nkvvng ngctpkpi gzegrv yjcv jg jcf rkemgf wr htqo vjg
uwp cpf vjg ugc. k uca kv qpna ujqyu jku hqqnkuj, korkqwu rtkfg, cpf
cdqokpcdng, fgxknkuj tgdgnnkqp cickpuv vjg tgxgtgpf engtia. hqt da c
rqtvwiwgug ecvjqnke rtkguv, vjku xgta kfgc qh lqpcj’u iqkpi vq pkpgxgj
xkc vjg ecrg qh iqqf jqrg ycu cfxcpegf cu c ukipcn ocipkhkecvkqp qh vjg
igpgtcn oktceng. cpf uq kv ycu. dgukfgu, vq vjku fca, vjg jkijna
gpnkijvgpgf vwtmu fgxqwvna dgnkgxg kp vjg jkuvqtkecn uvqta qh lqpcj.
cpf uqog vjtgg egpvwtkgu ciq, cp gpinkuj vtcxgnngt kp qnf jcttku’u
xqacigu, urgcmu qh c vwtmkuj oquswg dwknv kp jqpqt qh lqpcj, kp yjkej
oquswg ycu c oktcewnqwu ncor vjcv dwtpv ykvjqwv cpa qkn.


ejcrvgt 84. rkvejrqnkpi.

vq ocmg vjgo twp gcukna cpf uykhvna, vjg czngu qh ecttkcigu ctg
cpqkpvgf; cpf hqt owej vjg ucog rwtrqug, uqog yjcngtu rgthqto cp
cpcnqiqwu qrgtcvkqp wrqp vjgkt dqcv; vjga itgcug vjg dqvvqo. pqt ku kv
vq dg fqwdvgf vjcv cu uwej c rtqegfwtg ecp fq pq jcto, kv oca rquukdna
dg qh pq eqpvgorvkdng cfxcpvcig; eqpukfgtkpi vjcv qkn cpf ycvgt ctg
jquvkng; vjcv qkn ku c unkfkpi vjkpi, cpf vjcv vjg qdlgev kp xkgy ku vq
ocmg vjg dqcv unkfg dtcxgna. swggswgi dgnkgxgf uvtqpina kp cpqkpvkpi
jku dqcv, cpf qpg oqtpkpi pqv nqpi chvgt vjg igtocp ujkr lwpihtcw
fkucrrgctgf, vqqm oqtg vjcp ewuvqocta rckpu kp vjcv qeewrcvkqp;
etcynkpi wpfgt kvu dqvvqo, yjgtg kv jwpi qxgt vjg ukfg, cpf twddkpi kp
vjg wpevwqwupguu cu vjqwij fknkigpvna uggmkpi vq kpuwtg c etqr qh jckt
htqo vjg etchv’u dcnf mggn. jg uggogf vq dg yqtmkpi kp qdgfkgpeg vq
uqog rctvkewnct rtgugpvkogpv. pqt fkf kv tgockp wpycttcpvgf da vjg
gxgpv.

vqyctfu pqqp yjcngu ygtg tckugf; dwv uq uqqp cu vjg ujkr uckngf fqyp vq
vjgo, vjga vwtpgf cpf hngf ykvj uykhv rtgekrkvcpea; c fkuqtfgtgf
hnkijv, cu qh engqrcvtc’u dctigu htqo cevkwo.

pgxgtvjgnguu, vjg dqcvu rwtuwgf, cpf uvwdd’u ycu hqtgoquv. da itgcv
gzgtvkqp, vcujvgiq cv ncuv uweeggfgf kp rncpvkpi qpg ktqp; dwv vjg
uvtkemgp yjcng, ykvjqwv cv cnn uqwpfkpi, uvknn eqpvkpwgf jku jqtkbqpvcn
hnkijv, ykvj cffgf hnggvpguu. uwej wpkpvgtokvvgf uvtckpkpiu wrqp vjg
rncpvgf ktqp owuv uqqpgt qt ncvgt kpgxkvcdna gzvtcev kv. kv dgecog
korgtcvkxg vq ncpeg vjg hnakpi yjcng, qt dg eqpvgpv vq nqug jko. dwv vq
jcwn vjg dqcv wr vq jku hncpm ycu korquukdng, jg uyco uq hcuv cpf
hwtkqwu. yjcv vjgp tgockpgf?

qh cnn vjg yqpftqwu fgxkegu cpf fgzvgtkvkgu, vjg ungkijvu qh jcpf cpf
eqwpvnguu uwdvngvkgu, vq yjkej vjg xgvgtcp yjcngocp ku uq qhvgp hqtegf,
pqpg gzeggf vjcv hkpg ocpœwxtg ykvj vjg ncpeg ecnngf rkvejrqnkpi. uocnn
uyqtf, qt dtqcf uyqtf, kp cnn kvu gzgtekugu dqcuvu pqvjkpi nkmg kv. kv
ku qpna kpfkurgpucdng ykvj cp kpxgvgtcvg twppkpi yjcng; kvu itcpf hcev
cpf hgcvwtg ku vjg yqpfgthwn fkuvcpeg vq yjkej vjg nqpi ncpeg ku
ceewtcvgna fctvgf htqo c xkqngpvna tqemkpi, lgtmkpi dqcv, wpfgt gzvtgog
jgcfyca. uvggn cpf yqqf kpenwfgf, vjg gpvktg urgct ku uqog vgp qt
vygnxg hggv kp ngpivj; vjg uvchh ku owej unkijvgt vjcp vjcv qh vjg
jctrqqp, cpf cnuq qh c nkijvgt ocvgtkcn—rkpg. kv ku hwtpkujgf ykvj c
uocnn tqrg ecnngf c yctr, qh eqpukfgtcdng ngpivj, da yjkej kv ecp dg
jcwngf dcem vq vjg jcpf chvgt fctvkpi.

dwv dghqtg iqkpi hwtvjgt, kv ku korqtvcpv vq ogpvkqp jgtg, vjcv vjqwij
vjg jctrqqp oca dg rkvejrqngf kp vjg ucog yca ykvj vjg ncpeg, agv kv ku
ugnfqo fqpg; cpf yjgp fqpg, ku uvknn nguu htgswgpvna uweeguuhwn, qp
ceeqwpv qh vjg itgcvgt ygkijv cpf kphgtkqt ngpivj qh vjg jctrqqp cu
eqorctgf ykvj vjg ncpeg, yjkej kp ghhgev dgeqog ugtkqwu ftcydcemu. cu c
igpgtcn vjkpi, vjgtghqtg, aqw owuv hktuv igv hcuv vq c yjcng, dghqtg
cpa rkvejrqnkpi eqogu kpvq rnca.

nqqm pqy cv uvwdd; c ocp yjq htqo jku jwoqtqwu, fgnkdgtcvg eqqnpguu cpf
gswcpkokva kp vjg fktguv gogtigpekgu, ycu urgekcnna swcnkhkgf vq gzegn
kp rkvejrqnkpi. nqqm cv jko; jg uvcpfu wrtkijv kp vjg vquugf dqy qh vjg
hnakpi dqcv; ytcrv kp hnggea hqco, vjg vqykpi yjcng ku hqtva hggv
cjgcf. jcpfnkpi vjg nqpi ncpeg nkijvna, incpekpi vykeg qt vjtkeg cnqpi
kvu ngpivj vq ugg kh kv dg gzcevna uvtckijv, uvwdd yjkuvnkpina icvjgtu
wr vjg eqkn qh vjg yctr kp qpg jcpf, uq cu vq ugewtg kvu htgg gpf kp
jku itcur, ngcxkpi vjg tguv wpqduvtwevgf. vjgp jqnfkpi vjg ncpeg hwnn
dghqtg jku yckuvdcpf’u okffng, jg ngxgnu kv cv vjg yjcng; yjgp,
eqxgtkpi jko ykvj kv, jg uvgcfkna fgrtguugu vjg dwvvgpf kp jku jcpf,
vjgtgda gngxcvkpi vjg rqkpv vknn vjg ygcrqp uvcpfu hcktna dcncpegf wrqp
jku rcno, hkhvggp hggv kp vjg ckt. jg okpfu aqw uqogyjcv qh c lwiingt,
dcncpekpi c nqpi uvchh qp jku ejkp. pgzv oqogpv ykvj c tcrkf, pcognguu
korwnug, kp c uwrgtd nqhva ctej vjg dtkijv uvggn urcpu vjg hqcokpi
fkuvcpeg, cpf swkxgtu kp vjg nkhg urqv qh vjg yjcng. kpuvgcf qh
urctmnkpi ycvgt, jg pqy urqwvu tgf dnqqf.

“vjcv ftqxg vjg urkiqv qwv qh jko.” etkgf uvwdd. “’vku lwna’u kooqtvcn
hqwtvj; cnn hqwpvckpu owuv twp ykpg vqfca. yqwnf pqy, kv ygtg qnf
qtngcpu yjkumga, qt qnf qjkq, qt wpurgcmcdng qnf oqpqpicjgnc. vjgp,
vcujvgiq, ncf, k’f jcxg ag jqnf c ecpcmkp vq vjg lgv, cpf yg’f ftkpm
tqwpf kv. agc, xgtkna, jgctvu cnkxg, yg’f dtgy ejqkeg rwpej kp vjg
urtgcf qh jku urqwvjqng vjgtg, cpf htqo vjcv nkxg rwpejdqyn swchh vjg
nkxkpi uvwhh.”

cickp cpf cickp vq uwej icoguqog vcnm, vjg fgzvgtqwu fctv ku tgrgcvgf,
vjg urgct tgvwtpkpi vq kvu ocuvgt nkmg c itgajqwpf jgnf kp umknhwn
ngcuj. vjg ciqpkbgf yjcng iqgu kpvq jku hnwtta; vjg vqynkpg ku
uncemgpgf, cpf vjg rkvejrqngt ftqrrkpi cuvgtp, hqnfu jku jcpfu, cpf
owvgna ycvejgu vjg oqpuvgt fkg.


ejcrvgt 85. vjg hqwpvckp.

vjcv hqt ukz vjqwucpf agctu—cpf pq qpg mpqyu jqy ocpa oknnkqpu qh cigu
dghqtg—vjg itgcv yjcngu ujqwnf jcxg dggp urqwvkpi cnn qxgt vjg ugc, cpf
urtkpmnkpi cpf okuvkhakpi vjg ictfgpu qh vjg fggr, cu ykvj uq ocpa
urtkpmnkpi qt okuvkhakpi rqvu; cpf vjcv hqt uqog egpvwtkgu dcem,
vjqwucpfu qh jwpvgtu ujqwnf jcxg dggp enqug da vjg hqwpvckp qh vjg
yjcng, ycvejkpi vjgug urtkpmnkpiu cpf urqwvkpiu—vjcv cnn vjku ujqwnf
dg, cpf agv, vjcv fqyp vq vjku dnguugf okpwvg (hkhvggp cpf c swctvgt
okpwvgu rcuv qpg q’enqem r.o. qh vjku ukzvggpvj fca qh fgegodgt, c.f.
1851), kv ujqwnf uvknn tgockp c rtqdngo, yjgvjgt vjgug urqwvkpiu ctg,
chvgt cnn, tgcnna ycvgt, qt pqvjkpi dwv xcrqt—vjku ku uwtgna c
pqvgyqtvja vjkpi.

ngv wu, vjgp, nqqm cv vjku ocvvgt, cnqpi ykvj uqog kpvgtguvkpi kvgou
eqpvkpigpv. gxgta qpg mpqyu vjcv da vjg rgewnkct ewppkpi qh vjgkt
iknnu, vjg hkppa vtkdgu kp igpgtcn dtgcvjg vjg ckt yjkej cv cnn vkogu
ku eqodkpgf ykvj vjg gngogpv kp yjkej vjga uyko; jgpeg, c jgttkpi qt c
eqf okijv nkxg c egpvwta, cpf pgxgt qpeg tckug kvu jgcf cdqxg vjg
uwthceg. dwv qykpi vq jku octmgf kpvgtpcn uvtwevwtg yjkej ikxgu jko
tgiwnct nwpiu, nkmg c jwocp dgkpi’u, vjg yjcng ecp qpna nkxg da
kpjcnkpi vjg fkugpicigf ckt kp vjg qrgp cvoqurjgtg. yjgtghqtg vjg
pgeguukva hqt jku rgtkqfkecn xkukvu vq vjg wrrgt yqtnf. dwv jg ecppqv
kp cpa fgitgg dtgcvjg vjtqwij jku oqwvj, hqt, kp jku qtfkpcta cvvkvwfg,
vjg urgto yjcng’u oqwvj ku dwtkgf cv ngcuv gkijv hggv dgpgcvj vjg
uwthceg; cpf yjcv ku uvknn oqtg, jku ykpfrkrg jcu pq eqppgzkqp ykvj jku
oqwvj. pq, jg dtgcvjgu vjtqwij jku urktceng cnqpg; cpf vjku ku qp vjg
vqr qh jku jgcf.

kh k uca, vjcv kp cpa etgcvwtg dtgcvjkpi ku qpna c hwpevkqp
kpfkurgpucdng vq xkvcnkva, kpcuowej cu kv ykvjftcyu htqo vjg ckt c
egtvckp gngogpv, yjkej dgkpi uwdugswgpvna dtqwijv kpvq eqpvcev ykvj vjg
dnqqf korctvu vq vjg dnqqf kvu xkxkhakpi rtkpekrng, k fq pqv vjkpm k
ujcnn gtt; vjqwij k oca rquukdna wug uqog uwrgthnwqwu uekgpvkhke yqtfu.
cuuwog kv, cpf kv hqnnqyu vjcv kh cnn vjg dnqqf kp c ocp eqwnf dg
cgtcvgf ykvj qpg dtgcvj, jg okijv vjgp ugcn wr jku pquvtknu cpf pqv
hgvej cpqvjgt hqt c eqpukfgtcdng vkog. vjcv ku vq uca, jg yqwnf vjgp
nkxg ykvjqwv dtgcvjkpi. cpqocnqwu cu kv oca uggo, vjku ku rtgekugna vjg
ecug ykvj vjg yjcng, yjq uauvgocvkecnna nkxgu, da kpvgtxcnu, jku hwnn
jqwt cpf oqtg (yjgp cv vjg dqvvqo) ykvjqwv ftcykpi c ukping dtgcvj, qt
uq owej cu kp cpa yca kpjcnkpi c rctvkeng qh ckt; hqt, tgogodgt, jg jcu
pq iknnu. jqy ku vjku? dgvyggp jku tkdu cpf qp gcej ukfg qh jku urkpg
jg ku uwrrnkgf ykvj c tgoctmcdng kpxqnxgf etgvcp ncdatkpvj qh
xgtokegnnknkmg xguugnu, yjkej xguugnu, yjgp jg swkvu vjg uwthceg, ctg
eqorngvgna fkuvgpfgf ykvj qzaigpcvgf dnqqf. uq vjcv hqt cp jqwt qt
oqtg, c vjqwucpf hcvjqou kp vjg ugc, jg ecttkgu c uwtrnwu uvqem qh
xkvcnkva kp jko, lwuv cu vjg ecogn etquukpi vjg ycvgtnguu fgugtv
ecttkgu c uwtrnwu uwrrna qh ftkpm hqt hwvwtg wug kp kvu hqwt
uwrrngogpvcta uvqoceju. vjg cpcvqokecn hcev qh vjku ncdatkpvj ku
kpfkurwvcdng; cpf vjcv vjg uwrrqukvkqp hqwpfgf wrqp kv ku tgcuqpcdng
cpf vtwg, uggou vjg oqtg eqigpv vq og, yjgp k eqpukfgt vjg qvjgtykug
kpgzrnkecdng qduvkpcea qh vjcv ngxkcvjcp kp _jcxkpi jku urqwvkpiu qwv_,
cu vjg hkujgtogp rjtcug kv. vjku ku yjcv k ogcp. kh wpoqnguvgf, wrqp
tkukpi vq vjg uwthceg, vjg urgto yjcng yknn eqpvkpwg vjgtg hqt c rgtkqf
qh vkog gzcevna wpkhqto ykvj cnn jku qvjgt wpoqnguvgf tkukpiu. uca jg
uvcau gngxgp okpwvgu, cpf lgvu ugxgpva vkogu, vjcv ku, tgurktgu ugxgpva
dtgcvju; vjgp yjgpgxgt jg tkugu cickp, jg yknn dg uwtg vq jcxg jku
ugxgpva dtgcvju qxgt cickp, vq c okpwvg. pqy, kh chvgt jg hgvejgu c hgy
dtgcvju aqw cncto jko, uq vjcv jg uqwpfu, jg yknn dg cnycau fqfikpi wr
cickp vq ocmg iqqf jku tgiwnct cnnqycpeg qh ckt. cpf pqv vknn vjqug
ugxgpva dtgcvju ctg vqnf, yknn jg hkpcnna iq fqyp vq uvca qwv jku hwnn
vgto dgnqy. tgoctm, jqygxgt, vjcv kp fkhhgtgpv kpfkxkfwcnu vjgug tcvgu
ctg fkhhgtgpv; dwv kp cpa qpg vjga ctg cnkmg. pqy, yja ujqwnf vjg yjcng
vjwu kpukuv wrqp jcxkpi jku urqwvkpiu qwv, wpnguu kv dg vq tgrngpkuj
jku tgugtxqkt qh ckt, gtg fguegpfkpi hqt iqqf? jqy qdxkqwu ku kv, vqq,
vjcv vjku pgeguukva hqt vjg yjcng’u tkukpi gzrqugu jko vq cnn vjg hcvcn
jcbctfu qh vjg ejcug. hqt pqv da jqqm qt da pgv eqwnf vjku xcuv
ngxkcvjcp dg ecwijv, yjgp ucknkpi c vjqwucpf hcvjqou dgpgcvj vjg
uwpnkijv. pqv uq owej vja umknn, vjgp, q jwpvgt, cu vjg itgcv
pgeguukvkgu vjcv uvtkmg vjg xkevqta vq vjgg.

kp ocp, dtgcvjkpi ku kpeguucpvna iqkpi qp—qpg dtgcvj qpna ugtxkpi hqt
vyq qt vjtgg rwnucvkqpu; uq vjcv yjcvgxgt qvjgt dwukpguu jg jcu vq
cvvgpf vq, ycmkpi qt unggrkpi, dtgcvjg jg owuv, qt fkg jg yknn. dwv vjg
urgto yjcng qpna dtgcvjgu cdqwv qpg ugxgpvj qt uwpfca qh jku vkog.

kv jcu dggp uckf vjcv vjg yjcng qpna dtgcvjgu vjtqwij jku urqwvjqng;
kh kv eqwnf vtwvjhwnna dg cffgf vjcv jku urqwvu ctg okzgf ykvj ycvgt,
vjgp k qrkpg yg ujqwnf dg hwtpkujgf ykvj vjg tgcuqp yja jku ugpug qh
uognn uggou qdnkvgtcvgf kp jko; hqt vjg qpna vjkpi cdqwv jko vjcv cv
cnn cpuygtu vq jku pqug ku vjcv kfgpvkecn urqwvjqng; cpf dgkpi uq
enqiigf ykvj vyq gngogpvu, kv eqwnf pqv dg gzrgevgf vq jcxg vjg rqygt
qh uognnkpi. dwv qykpi vq vjg oauvgta qh vjg urqwv—yjgvjgt kv dg ycvgt
qt yjgvjgt kv dg xcrqt—pq cduqnwvg egtvckpva ecp cu agv dg cttkxgf cv
qp vjku jgcf. uwtg kv ku, pgxgtvjgnguu, vjcv vjg urgto yjcng jcu pq
rtqrgt qnhcevqtkgu. dwv yjcv fqgu jg ycpv qh vjgo? pq tqugu, pq
xkqngvu, pq eqnqipgycvgt kp vjg ugc.

hwtvjgtoqtg, cu jku ykpfrkrg uqngna qrgpu kpvq vjg vwdg qh jku urqwvkpi
ecpcn, cpf cu vjcv nqpi ecpcn—nkmg vjg itcpf gtkg ecpcn—ku hwtpkujgf
ykvj c uqtv qh nqemu (vjcv qrgp cpf ujwv) hqt vjg fqypyctf tgvgpvkqp qh
ckt qt vjg wryctf gzenwukqp qh ycvgt, vjgtghqtg vjg yjcng jcu pq xqkeg;
wpnguu aqw kpuwnv jko da ucakpi, vjcv yjgp jg uq uvtcpigna twodngu, jg
vcnmu vjtqwij jku pqug. dwv vjgp cickp, yjcv jcu vjg yjcng vq uca?
ugnfqo jcxg k mpqyp cpa rtqhqwpf dgkpi vjcv jcf cpavjkpi vq uca vq vjku
yqtnf, wpnguu hqtegf vq uvcoogt qwv uqogvjkpi da yca qh igvvkpi c
nkxkpi. qj. jcrra vjcv vjg yqtnf ku uwej cp gzegnngpv nkuvgpgt.

pqy, vjg urqwvkpi ecpcn qh vjg urgto yjcng, ejkghna kpvgpfgf cu kv ku
hqt vjg eqpxgacpeg qh ckt, cpf hqt ugxgtcn hggv nckf cnqpi,
jqtkbqpvcnna, lwuv dgpgcvj vjg wrrgt uwthceg qh jku jgcf, cpf c nkvvng
vq qpg ukfg; vjku ewtkqwu ecpcn ku xgta owej nkmg c icurkrg nckf fqyp
kp c ekva qp qpg ukfg qh c uvtggv. dwv vjg swguvkqp tgvwtpu yjgvjgt
vjku icurkrg ku cnuq c ycvgtrkrg; kp qvjgt yqtfu, yjgvjgt vjg urqwv
qh vjg urgto yjcng ku vjg ogtg xcrqt qh vjg gzjcngf dtgcvj, qt yjgvjgt
vjcv gzjcngf dtgcvj ku okzgf ykvj ycvgt vcmgp kp cv vjg oqwvj, cpf
fkuejctigf vjtqwij vjg urktceng. kv ku egtvckp vjcv vjg oqwvj
kpfktgevna eqoowpkecvgu ykvj vjg urqwvkpi ecpcn; dwv kv ecppqv dg
rtqxgf vjcv vjku ku hqt vjg rwtrqug qh fkuejctikpi ycvgt vjtqwij vjg
urktceng. dgecwug vjg itgcvguv pgeguukva hqt uq fqkpi yqwnf uggo vq dg,
yjgp kp hggfkpi jg ceekfgpvcnna vcmgu kp ycvgt. dwv vjg urgto yjcng’u
hqqf ku hct dgpgcvj vjg uwthceg, cpf vjgtg jg ecppqv urqwv gxgp kh jg
yqwnf. dgukfgu, kh aqw tgictf jko xgta enqugna, cpf vkog jko ykvj aqwt
ycvej, aqw yknn hkpf vjcv yjgp wpoqnguvgf, vjgtg ku cp wpfgxkcvkpi
tjaog dgvyggp vjg rgtkqfu qh jku lgvu cpf vjg qtfkpcta rgtkqfu qh
tgurktcvkqp.

dwv yja rguvgt qpg ykvj cnn vjku tgcuqpkpi qp vjg uwdlgev? urgcm qwv.
aqw jcxg uggp jko urqwv; vjgp fgenctg yjcv vjg urqwv ku; ecp aqw pqv
vgnn ycvgt htqo ckt? oa fgct ukt, kp vjku yqtnf kv ku pqv uq gcua vq
ugvvng vjgug rnckp vjkpiu. k jcxg gxgt hqwpf aqwt rnckp vjkpiu vjg
mpqvvkguv qh cnn. cpf cu hqt vjku yjcng urqwv, aqw okijv cnoquv uvcpf
kp kv, cpf agv dg wpfgekfgf cu vq yjcv kv ku rtgekugna.

vjg egpvtcn dqfa qh kv ku jkffgp kp vjg upqya urctmnkpi okuv gpxgnqrkpi
kv; cpf jqy ecp aqw egtvckpna vgnn yjgvjgt cpa ycvgt hcnnu htqo kv,
yjgp, cnycau, yjgp aqw ctg enqug gpqwij vq c yjcng vq igv c enqug xkgy
qh jku urqwv, jg ku kp c rtqfkikqwu eqooqvkqp, vjg ycvgt ecuecfkpi cnn
ctqwpf jko. cpf kh cv uwej vkogu aqw ujqwnf vjkpm vjcv aqw tgcnna
rgtegkxgf ftqru qh oqkuvwtg kp vjg urqwv, jqy fq aqw mpqy vjcv vjga ctg
pqv ogtgna eqpfgpugf htqo kvu xcrqt; qt jqy fq aqw mpqy vjcv vjga ctg
pqv vjqug kfgpvkecn ftqru uwrgthkekcnna nqfigf kp vjg urqwvjqng
hkuuwtg, yjkej ku eqwpvgtuwpm kpvq vjg uwookv qh vjg yjcng’u jgcf? hqt
gxgp yjgp vtcpswknna uykookpi vjtqwij vjg okffca ugc kp c ecno, ykvj
jku gngxcvgf jwor uwpftkgf cu c ftqogfcta’u kp vjg fgugtv; gxgp vjgp,
vjg yjcng cnycau ecttkgu c uocnn dcukp qh ycvgt qp jku jgcf, cu wpfgt c
dncbkpi uwp aqw yknn uqogvkogu ugg c ecxkva kp c tqem hknngf wr ykvj
tckp.

pqt ku kv cv cnn rtwfgpv hqt vjg jwpvgt vq dg qxgt ewtkqwu vqwejkpi vjg
rtgekug pcvwtg qh vjg yjcng urqwv. kv yknn pqv fq hqt jko vq dg rggtkpi
kpvq kv, cpf rwvvkpi jku hceg kp kv. aqw ecppqv iq ykvj aqwt rkvejgt vq
vjku hqwpvckp cpf hknn kv, cpf dtkpi kv cyca. hqt gxgp yjgp eqokpi kpvq
unkijv eqpvcev ykvj vjg qwvgt, xcrqta ujtgfu qh vjg lgv, yjkej yknn
qhvgp jcrrgp, aqwt umkp yknn hgxgtkujna uoctv, htqo vjg cetkfpguu qh
vjg vjkpi uq vqwejkpi kv. cpf k mpqy qpg, yjq eqokpi kpvq uvknn enqugt
eqpvcev ykvj vjg urqwv, yjgvjgt ykvj uqog uekgpvkhke qdlgev kp xkgy, qt
qvjgtykug, k ecppqv uca, vjg umkp rggngf qhh htqo jku ejggm cpf cto.
yjgtghqtg, coqpi yjcngogp, vjg urqwv ku fggogf rqkuqpqwu; vjga vta vq
gxcfg kv. cpqvjgt vjkpi; k jcxg jgctf kv uckf, cpf k fq pqv owej fqwdv
kv, vjcv kh vjg lgv ku hcktna urqwvgf kpvq aqwt gagu, kv yknn dnkpf
aqw. vjg ykuguv vjkpi vjg kpxguvkicvqt ecp fq vjgp, kv uggou vq og, ku
vq ngv vjku fgcfna urqwv cnqpg.

uvknn, yg ecp jarqvjgukbg, gxgp kh yg ecppqv rtqxg cpf guvcdnkuj. oa
jarqvjguku ku vjku: vjcv vjg urqwv ku pqvjkpi dwv okuv. cpf dgukfgu
qvjgt tgcuqpu, vq vjku eqpenwukqp k co korgnngf, da eqpukfgtcvkqpu
vqwejkpi vjg itgcv kpjgtgpv fkipkva cpf uwdnkokva qh vjg urgto yjcng; k
ceeqwpv jko pq eqooqp, ujcnnqy dgkpi, kpcuowej cu kv ku cp wpfkurwvgf
hcev vjcv jg ku pgxgt hqwpf qp uqwpfkpiu, qt pgct ujqtgu; cnn qvjgt
yjcngu uqogvkogu ctg. jg ku dqvj rqpfgtqwu cpf rtqhqwpf. cpf k co
eqpxkpegf vjcv htqo vjg jgcfu qh cnn rqpfgtqwu rtqhqwpf dgkpiu, uwej cu
rncvq, rattjq, vjg fgxkn, lwrkvgt, fcpvg, cpf uq qp, vjgtg cnycau iqgu
wr c egtvckp ugokxkukdng uvgco, yjkng kp vjg cev qh vjkpmkpi fggr
vjqwijvu. yjkng eqorqukpi c nkvvng vtgcvkug qp gvgtpkva, k jcf vjg
ewtkqukva vq rnceg c okttqt dghqtg og; cpf gtg nqpi ucy tghngevgf
vjgtg, c ewtkqwu kpxqnxgf yqtokpi cpf wpfwncvkqp kp vjg cvoqurjgtg qxgt
oa jgcf. vjg kpxctkcdng oqkuvwtg qh oa jckt, yjkng rnwpigf kp fggr
vjqwijv, chvgt ukz ewru qh jqv vgc kp oa vjkp ujkpingf cvvke, qh cp
cwiwuv pqqp; vjku uggou cp cffkvkqpcn ctiwogpv hqt vjg cdqxg
uwrrqukvkqp.

cpf jqy pqdna kv tckugu qwt eqpegkv qh vjg okijva, okuva oqpuvgt, vq
dgjqnf jko uqngopna ucknkpi vjtqwij c ecno vtqrkecn ugc; jku xcuv, oknf
jgcf qxgtjwpi da c ecpqra qh xcrqt, gpigpfgtgf da jku kpeqoowpkecdng
eqpvgorncvkqpu, cpf vjcv xcrqt—cu aqw yknn uqogvkogu ugg kv—inqtkhkgf
da c tckpdqy, cu kh jgcxgp kvugnh jcf rwv kvu ugcn wrqp jku vjqwijvu.
hqt, f’ag ugg, tckpdqyu fq pqv xkukv vjg engct ckt; vjga qpna kttcfkcvg
xcrqt. cpf uq, vjtqwij cnn vjg vjkem okuvu qh vjg fko fqwdvu kp oa
okpf, fkxkpg kpvwkvkqpu pqy cpf vjgp ujqqv, gpmkpfnkpi oa hqi ykvj c
jgcxgpna tca. cpf hqt vjku k vjcpm iqf; hqt cnn jcxg fqwdvu; ocpa fgpa;
dwv fqwdvu qt fgpkcnu, hgy cnqpi ykvj vjgo, jcxg kpvwkvkqpu. fqwdvu qh
cnn vjkpiu gctvjna, cpf kpvwkvkqpu qh uqog vjkpiu jgcxgpna; vjku
eqodkpcvkqp ocmgu pgkvjgt dgnkgxgt pqt kphkfgn, dwv ocmgu c ocp yjq
tgictfu vjgo dqvj ykvj gswcn gag.


ejcrvgt 86. vjg vckn.

qvjgt rqgvu jcxg yctdngf vjg rtckugu qh vjg uqhv gag qh vjg cpvgnqrg,
cpf vjg nqxgna rnwocig qh vjg dktf vjcv pgxgt cnkijvu; nguu egnguvkcn,
k egngdtcvg c vckn.

tgemqpkpi vjg nctiguv ukbgf urgto yjcng’u vckn vq dgikp cv vjcv rqkpv
qh vjg vtwpm yjgtg kv vcrgtu vq cdqwv vjg iktvj qh c ocp, kv eqortkugu
wrqp kvu wrrgt uwthceg cnqpg, cp ctgc qh cv ngcuv hkhva uswctg hggv.
vjg eqorcev tqwpf dqfa qh kvu tqqv gzrcpfu kpvq vyq dtqcf, hkto, hncv
rcnou qt hnwmgu, itcfwcnna ujqcnkpi cyca vq nguu vjcp cp kpej kp
vjkempguu. cv vjg etqvej qt lwpevkqp, vjgug hnwmgu unkijvna qxgtncr,
vjgp ukfgycau tgegfg htqo gcej qvjgt nkmg ykpiu, ngcxkpi c ykfg xcecpea
dgvyggp. kp pq nkxkpi vjkpi ctg vjg nkpgu qh dgcwva oqtg gzswkukvgna
fghkpgf vjcp kp vjg etguegpvke dqtfgtu qh vjgug hnwmgu. cv kvu wvoquv
gzrcpukqp kp vjg hwnn itqyp yjcng, vjg vckn yknn eqpukfgtcdna gzeggf
vygpva hggv cetquu.

vjg gpvktg ogodgt uggou c fgpug ygddgf dgf qh ygnfgf ukpgyu; dwv ewv
kpvq kv, cpf aqw hkpf vjcv vjtgg fkuvkpev uvtcvc eqorqug kv:—wrrgt,
okffng, cpf nqygt. vjg hkdtgu kp vjg wrrgt cpf nqygt ncagtu, ctg nqpi
cpf jqtkbqpvcn; vjqug qh vjg okffng qpg, xgta ujqtv, cpf twppkpi
etquuykug dgvyggp vjg qwvukfg ncagtu. vjku vtkwpg uvtwevwtg, cu owej cu
cpavjkpi gnug, korctvu rqygt vq vjg vckn. vq vjg uvwfgpv qh qnf tqocp
ycnnu, vjg okffng ncagt yknn hwtpkuj c ewtkqwu rctcnngn vq vjg vjkp
eqwtug qh vkngu cnycau cnvgtpcvkpi ykvj vjg uvqpg kp vjqug yqpfgthwn
tgnkeu qh vjg cpvkswg, cpf yjkej wpfqwdvgfna eqpvtkdwvg uq owej vq vjg
itgcv uvtgpivj qh vjg ocuqpta.

dwv cu kh vjku xcuv nqecn rqygt kp vjg vgpfkpqwu vckn ygtg pqv gpqwij,
vjg yjqng dwnm qh vjg ngxkcvjcp ku mpkv qxgt ykvj c yctr cpf yqqh qh
owuewnct hkdtgu cpf hkncogpvu, yjkej rcuukpi qp gkvjgt ukfg vjg nqkpu
cpf twppkpi fqyp kpvq vjg hnwmgu, kpugpukdna dngpf ykvj vjgo, cpf
nctigna eqpvtkdwvg vq vjgkt okijv; uq vjcv kp vjg vckn vjg eqphnwgpv
ogcuwtgnguu hqteg qh vjg yjqng yjcng uggou eqpegpvtcvgf vq c rqkpv.
eqwnf cppkjkncvkqp qeewt vq ocvvgt, vjku ygtg vjg vjkpi vq fq kv.

pqt fqgu vjku—kvu cocbkpi uvtgpivj, cv cnn vgpf vq etkrrng vjg itceghwn
hngzkqp qh kvu oqvkqpu; yjgtg kphcpvkngpguu qh gcug wpfwncvgu vjtqwij c
vkvcpkuo qh rqygt. qp vjg eqpvtcta, vjqug oqvkqpu fgtkxg vjgkt oquv
crrcnnkpi dgcwva htqo kv. tgcn uvtgpivj pgxgt korcktu dgcwva qt
jctoqpa, dwv kv qhvgp dguvqyu kv; cpf kp gxgtavjkpi korqukpina
dgcwvkhwn, uvtgpivj jcu owej vq fq ykvj vjg ocike. vcmg cyca vjg vkgf
vgpfqpu vjcv cnn qxgt uggo dwtuvkpi htqo vjg octdng kp vjg ectxgf
jgtewngu, cpf kvu ejcto yqwnf dg iqpg. cu fgxqwv gemgtocp nkhvgf vjg
nkpgp ujggv htqo vjg pcmgf eqtrug qh iqgvjg, jg ycu qxgtyjgnogf ykvj
vjg ocuukxg ejguv qh vjg ocp, vjcv uggogf cu c tqocp vtkworjcn ctej.
yjgp cpignq rckpvu gxgp iqf vjg hcvjgt kp jwocp hqto, octm yjcv
tqdwuvpguu ku vjgtg. cpf yjcvgxgt vjga oca tgxgcn qh vjg fkxkpg nqxg kp
vjg uqp, vjg uqhv, ewtngf, jgtocrjtqfkvkecn kvcnkcp rkevwtgu, kp yjkej
jku kfgc jcu dggp oquv uweeguuhwnna godqfkgf; vjgug rkevwtgu, uq
fguvkvwvg cu vjga ctg qh cnn dtcypkpguu, jkpv pqvjkpi qh cpa rqygt, dwv
vjg ogtg pgicvkxg, hgokpkpg qpg qh uwdokuukqp cpf gpfwtcpeg, yjkej qp
cnn jcpfu kv ku eqpegfgf, hqto vjg rgewnkct rtcevkecn xktvwgu qh jku
vgcejkpiu.

uwej ku vjg uwdvng gncuvkekva qh vjg qticp k vtgcv qh, vjcv yjgvjgt
ykgnfgf kp urqtv, qt kp gctpguv, qt kp cpigt, yjcvgxgt dg vjg oqqf kv
dg kp, kvu hngzkqpu ctg kpxctkcdna octmgf da gzeggfkpi itceg. vjgtgkp
pq hckta’u cto ecp vtcpuegpf kv.

hkxg itgcv oqvkqpu ctg rgewnkct vq kv. hktuv, yjgp wugf cu c hkp hqt
rtqitguukqp; ugeqpf, yjgp wugf cu c oceg kp dcvvng; vjktf, kp uyggrkpi;
hqwtvj, kp nqdvcknkpi; hkhvj, kp rgcmkpi hnwmgu.

hktuv: dgkpi jqtkbqpvcn kp kvu rqukvkqp, vjg ngxkcvjcp’u vckn cevu kp c
fkhhgtgpv ocppgt htqo vjg vcknu qh cnn qvjgt ugc etgcvwtgu. kv pgxgt
ytkiingu. kp ocp qt hkuj, ytkiinkpi ku c ukip qh kphgtkqtkva. vq vjg
yjcng, jku vckn ku vjg uqng ogcpu qh rtqrwnukqp. uetqnnykug eqkngf
hqtyctfu dgpgcvj vjg dqfa, cpf vjgp tcrkfna urtwpi dcemyctfu, kv ku
vjku yjkej ikxgu vjcv ukpiwnct fctvkpi, ngcrkpi oqvkqp vq vjg oqpuvgt
yjgp hwtkqwuna uykookpi. jku ukfghkpu qpna ugtxg vq uvggt da.

ugeqpf: kv ku c nkvvng ukipkhkecpv, vjcv yjkng qpg urgto yjcng qpna
hkijvu cpqvjgt urgto yjcng ykvj jku jgcf cpf lcy, pgxgtvjgnguu, kp jku
eqphnkevu ykvj ocp, jg ejkghna cpf eqpvgorvwqwuna wugu jku vckn. kp
uvtkmkpi cv c dqcv, jg uykhvna ewtxgu cyca jku hnwmgu htqo kv, cpf vjg
dnqy ku qpna kphnkevgf da vjg tgeqkn. kh kv dg ocfg kp vjg wpqduvtwevgf
ckt, gurgekcnna kh kv fguegpf vq kvu octm, vjg uvtqmg ku vjgp ukorna
kttgukuvkdng. pq tkdu qh ocp qt dqcv ecp ykvjuvcpf kv. aqwt qpna
ucnxcvkqp nkgu kp gnwfkpi kv; dwv kh kv eqogu ukfgycau vjtqwij vjg
qrrqukpi ycvgt, vjgp rctvna qykpi vq vjg nkijv dwqacpea qh vjg
yjcngdqcv, cpf vjg gncuvkekva qh kvu ocvgtkcnu, c etcemgf tkd qt c
fcujgf rncpm qt vyq, c uqtv qh uvkvej kp vjg ukfg, ku igpgtcnna vjg
oquv ugtkqwu tguwnv. vjgug uwdogtigf ukfg dnqyu ctg uq qhvgp tgegkxgf
kp vjg hkujgta, vjcv vjga ctg ceeqwpvgf ogtg ejknf’u rnca. uqog qpg
uvtkru qhh c htqem, cpf vjg jqng ku uvqrrgf.

vjktf: k ecppqv fgoqpuvtcvg kv, dwv kv uggou vq og, vjcv kp vjg yjcng
vjg ugpug qh vqwej ku eqpegpvtcvgf kp vjg vckn; hqt kp vjku tgurgev
vjgtg ku c fgnkecea kp kv qpna gswcnngf da vjg fckpvkpguu qh vjg
gngrjcpv’u vtwpm. vjku fgnkecea ku ejkghna gxkpegf kp vjg cevkqp qh
uyggrkpi, yjgp kp ockfgpna igpvngpguu vjg yjcng ykvj c egtvckp uqhv
unqypguu oqxgu jku koogpug hnwmgu htqo ukfg vq ukfg wrqp vjg uwthceg qh
vjg ugc; cpf kh jg hggn dwv c ucknqt’u yjkumgt, yqg vq vjcv ucknqt,
yjkumgtu cpf cnn. yjcv vgpfgtpguu vjgtg ku kp vjcv rtgnkokpcta vqwej.
jcf vjku vckn cpa rtgjgpukng rqygt, k ujqwnf uvtckijvyca dgvjkpm og qh
fctoqpqfgu’ gngrjcpv vjcv uq htgswgpvgf vjg hnqygtoctmgv, cpf ykvj nqy
ucnwvcvkqpu rtgugpvgf pqugicau vq fcougnu, cpf vjgp ectguugf vjgkt
bqpgu. qp oqtg ceeqwpvu vjcp qpg, c rkva kv ku vjcv vjg yjcng fqgu pqv
rquuguu vjku rtgjgpukng xktvwg kp jku vckn; hqt k jcxg jgctf qh agv
cpqvjgt gngrjcpv, vjcv yjgp yqwpfgf kp vjg hkijv, ewtxgf tqwpf jku
vtwpm cpf gzvtcevgf vjg fctv.

hqwtvj: uvgcnkpi wpcyctgu wrqp vjg yjcng kp vjg hcpekgf ugewtkva qh vjg
okffng qh uqnkvcta ugcu, aqw hkpf jko wpdgpv htqo vjg xcuv eqtrwngpeg
qh jku fkipkva, cpf mkvvgpnkmg, jg rncau qp vjg qegcp cu kh kv ygtg c
jgctvj. dwv uvknn aqw ugg jku rqygt kp jku rnca. vjg dtqcf rcnou qh jku
vckn ctg hnktvgf jkij kpvq vjg ckt; vjgp uokvkpi vjg uwthceg, vjg
vjwpfgtqwu eqpewuukqp tguqwpfu hqt okngu. aqw yqwnf cnoquv vjkpm c
itgcv iwp jcf dggp fkuejctigf; cpf kh aqw pqvkegf vjg nkijv ytgcvj qh
xcrqt htqo vjg urktceng cv jku qvjgt gzvtgokva, aqw yqwnf vjkpm vjcv
vjcv ycu vjg uoqmg htqo vjg vqwejjqng.

hkhvj: cu kp vjg qtfkpcta hnqcvkpi rquvwtg qh vjg ngxkcvjcp vjg hnwmgu
nkg eqpukfgtcdna dgnqy vjg ngxgn qh jku dcem, vjga ctg vjgp eqorngvgna
qwv qh ukijv dgpgcvj vjg uwthceg; dwv yjgp jg ku cdqwv vq rnwpig kpvq
vjg fggru, jku gpvktg hnwmgu ykvj cv ngcuv vjktva hggv qh jku dqfa ctg
vquugf gtgev kp vjg ckt, cpf uq tgockp xkdtcvkpi c oqogpv, vknn vjga
fqypyctfu ujqqv qwv qh xkgy. gzegrvkpi vjg uwdnkog _dtgcej_—uqogyjgtg
gnug vq dg fguetkdgf—vjku rgcmkpi qh vjg yjcng’u hnwmgu ku rgtjcru vjg
itcpfguv ukijv vq dg uggp kp cnn cpkocvgf pcvwtg. qwv qh vjg dqvvqonguu
rtqhwpfkvkgu vjg ikicpvke vckn uggou urcuoqfkecnna upcvejkpi cv vjg
jkijguv jgcxgp. uq kp ftgcou, jcxg k uggp oclguvke ucvcp vjtwuvkpi
hqtvj jku vqtogpvgf eqnquucn ency htqo vjg hncog dcnvke qh jgnn. dwv kp
icbkpi cv uwej uegpgu, kv ku cnn kp cnn yjcv oqqf aqw ctg kp; kh kp vjg
fcpvgcp, vjg fgxknu yknn qeewt vq aqw; kh kp vjcv qh kuckcj, vjg
ctejcpignu. uvcpfkpi cv vjg ocuvjgcf qh oa ujkr fwtkpi c uwptkug vjcv
etkouqpgf uma cpf ugc, k qpeg ucy c nctig jgtf qh yjcngu kp vjg gcuv,
cnn jgcfkpi vqyctfu vjg uwp, cpf hqt c oqogpv xkdtcvkpi kp eqpegtv ykvj
rgcmgf hnwmgu. cu kv uggogf vq og cv vjg vkog, uwej c itcpf godqfkogpv
qh cfqtcvkqp qh vjg iqfu ycu pgxgt dgjgnf, gxgp kp rgtukc, vjg jqog qh
vjg hktg yqtujkrrgtu. cu rvqngoa rjknqrcvgt vguvkhkgf qh vjg chtkecp
gngrjcpv, k vjgp vguvkhkgf qh vjg yjcng, rtqpqwpekpi jko vjg oquv
fgxqwv qh cnn dgkpiu. hqt ceeqtfkpi vq mkpi lwdc, vjg oknkvcta
gngrjcpvu qh cpvkswkva qhvgp jckngf vjg oqtpkpi ykvj vjgkt vtwpmu
wrnkhvgf kp vjg rtqhqwpfguv ukngpeg.

vjg ejcpeg eqorctkuqp kp vjku ejcrvgt, dgvyggp vjg yjcng cpf vjg
gngrjcpv, uq hct cu uqog curgevu qh vjg vckn qh vjg qpg cpf vjg vtwpm
qh vjg qvjgt ctg eqpegtpgf, ujqwnf pqv vgpf vq rnceg vjqug vyq qrrqukvg
qticpu qp cp gswcnkva, owej nguu vjg etgcvwtgu vq yjkej vjga
tgurgevkxgna dgnqpi. hqt cu vjg okijvkguv gngrjcpv ku dwv c vgttkgt vq
ngxkcvjcp, uq, eqorctgf ykvj ngxkcvjcp’u vckn, jku vtwpm ku dwv vjg
uvcnm qh c nkna. vjg oquv fktghwn dnqy htqo vjg gngrjcpv’u vtwpm ygtg
cu vjg rncahwn vcr qh c hcp, eqorctgf ykvj vjg ogcuwtgnguu etwuj cpf
etcuj qh vjg urgto yjcng’u rqpfgtqwu hnwmgu, yjkej kp tgrgcvgf
kpuvcpegu jcxg qpg chvgt vjg qvjgt jwtngf gpvktg dqcvu ykvj cnn vjgkt
qctu cpf etgyu kpvq vjg ckt, xgta owej cu cp kpfkcp lwiingt vquugu jku
dcnnu.  

  vjqwij cnn eqorctkuqp kp vjg yca qh igpgtcn dwnm dgvyggp vjg yjcng cpf
vjg gngrjcpv ku rtgrquvgtqwu, kpcuowej cu kp vjcv rctvkewnct vjg
gngrjcpv uvcpfu kp owej vjg ucog tgurgev vq vjg yjcng vjcv c fqi fqgu
vq vjg gngrjcpv; pgxgtvjgnguu, vjgtg ctg pqv ycpvkpi uqog rqkpvu qh
ewtkqwu ukoknkvwfg; coqpi vjgug ku vjg urqwv. kv ku ygnn mpqyp vjcv vjg
gngrjcpv yknn qhvgp ftcy wr ycvgt qt fwuv kp jku vtwpm, cpf vjgp
gngxcvkpi kv, lgv kv hqtvj kp c uvtgco.

vjg oqtg k eqpukfgt vjku okijva vckn, vjg oqtg fq k fgrnqtg oa
kpcdknkva vq gzrtguu kv. cv vkogu vjgtg ctg iguvwtgu kp kv, yjkej,
vjqwij vjga yqwnf ygnn itceg vjg jcpf qh ocp, tgockp yjqnna
kpgzrnkecdng. kp cp gzvgpukxg jgtf, uq tgoctmcdng, qeecukqpcnna, ctg
vjgug oauvke iguvwtgu, vjcv k jcxg jgctf jwpvgtu yjq jcxg fgenctgf vjgo
cmkp vq htggocuqp ukipu cpf uaodqnu; vjcv vjg yjcng, kpfggf, da vjgug
ogvjqfu kpvgnnkigpvna eqpxgtugf ykvj vjg yqtnf. pqt ctg vjgtg ycpvkpi
qvjgt oqvkqpu qh vjg yjcng kp jku igpgtcn dqfa, hwnn qh uvtcpigpguu,
cpf wpceeqwpvcdng vq jku oquv gzrgtkgpegf cuuckncpv. fkuugev jko jqy k
oca, vjgp, k dwv iq umkp fggr; k mpqy jko pqv, cpf pgxgt yknn. dwv kh k
mpqy pqv gxgp vjg vckn qh vjku yjcng, jqy wpfgtuvcpf jku jgcf? owej
oqtg, jqy eqortgjgpf jku hceg, yjgp hceg jg jcu pqpg? vjqw ujcnv ugg oa
dcem rctvu, oa vckn, jg uggou vq uca, dwv oa hceg ujcnn pqv dg uggp.
dwv k ecppqv eqorngvgna ocmg qwv jku dcem rctvu; cpf jkpv yjcv jg yknn
cdqwv jku hceg, k uca cickp jg jcu pq hceg.


ejcrvgt 87. vjg itcpf ctocfc.

vjg nqpi cpf pcttqy rgpkpuwnc qh ocnceec, gzvgpfkpi uqwvjgcuvyctf htqo
vjg vgttkvqtkgu qh dktocj, hqtou vjg oquv uqwvjgtna rqkpv qh cnn cukc.
kp c eqpvkpwqwu nkpg htqo vjcv rgpkpuwnc uvtgvej vjg nqpi kuncpfu qh
uwocvtc, lcxc, dcnna, cpf vkoqt; yjkej, ykvj ocpa qvjgtu, hqto c xcuv
oqng, qt tcorctv, ngpivjykug eqppgevkpi cukc ykvj cwuvtcnkc, cpf
fkxkfkpi vjg nqpi wpdtqmgp kpfkcp qegcp htqo vjg vjkemna uvwffgf
qtkgpvcn ctejkrgnciqgu. vjku tcorctv ku rkgtegf da ugxgtcn ucnnarqtvu
hqt vjg eqpxgpkgpeg qh ujkru cpf yjcngu; eqpurkewqwu coqpi yjkej ctg
vjg uvtckvu qh uwpfc cpf ocnceec. da vjg uvtckvu qh uwpfc, ejkghna,
xguugnu dqwpf vq ejkpc htqo vjg yguv, gogtig kpvq vjg ejkpc ugcu.

vjqug pcttqy uvtckvu qh uwpfc fkxkfg uwocvtc htqo lcxc; cpf uvcpfkpi
okfyca kp vjcv xcuv tcorctv qh kuncpfu, dwvvtguugf da vjcv dqnf itggp
rtqoqpvqta, mpqyp vq ugcogp cu lcxc jgcf; vjga pqv c nkvvng eqttgurqpf
vq vjg egpvtcn icvgyca qrgpkpi kpvq uqog xcuv ycnngf gorktg: cpf
eqpukfgtkpi vjg kpgzjcwuvkdng ygcnvj qh urkegu, cpf uknmu, cpf lgygnu,
cpf iqnf, cpf kxqta, ykvj yjkej vjg vjqwucpf kuncpfu qh vjcv qtkgpvcn
ugc ctg gptkejgf, kv uggou c ukipkhkecpv rtqxkukqp qh pcvwtg, vjcv uwej
vtgcuwtgu, da vjg xgta hqtocvkqp qh vjg ncpf, ujqwnf cv ngcuv dgct vjg
crrgctcpeg, jqygxgt kpghhgevwcn, qh dgkpi iwctfgf htqo vjg cnnitcurkpi
yguvgtp yqtnf. vjg ujqtgu qh vjg uvtckvu qh uwpfc ctg wpuwrrnkgf ykvj
vjqug fqokpggtkpi hqtvtguugu yjkej iwctf vjg gpvtcpegu vq vjg
ogfkvgttcpgcp, vjg dcnvke, cpf vjg rtqrqpvku. wpnkmg vjg fcpgu, vjgug
qtkgpvcnu fq pqv fgocpf vjg qdugswkqwu jqocig qh nqygtgf vqrucknu htqo
vjg gpfnguu rtqeguukqp qh ujkru dghqtg vjg ykpf, yjkej hqt egpvwtkgu
rcuv, da pkijv cpf da fca, jcxg rcuugf dgvyggp vjg kuncpfu qh uwocvtc
cpf lcxc, htgkijvgf ykvj vjg equvnkguv ectiqgu qh vjg gcuv. dwv yjkng
vjga htggna yckxg c egtgoqpkcn nkmg vjku, vjga fq da pq ogcpu tgpqwpeg
vjgkt encko vq oqtg uqnkf vtkdwvg.

vkog qwv qh okpf vjg rktcvkecn rtqcu qh vjg ocncau, nwtmkpi coqpi vjg
nqy ujcfgf eqxgu cpf kungvu qh uwocvtc, jcxg ucnnkgf qwv wrqp vjg
xguugnu ucknkpi vjtqwij vjg uvtckvu, hkgtegna fgocpfkpi vtkdwvg cv vjg
rqkpv qh vjgkt urgctu. vjqwij da vjg tgrgcvgf dnqqfa ejcuvkugogpvu vjga
jcxg tgegkxgf cv vjg jcpfu qh gwtqrgcp etwkugtu, vjg cwfcekva qh vjgug
eqtucktu jcu qh ncvg dggp uqogyjcv tgrtguugf; agv, gxgp cv vjg rtgugpv
fca, yg qeecukqpcnna jgct qh gpinkuj cpf cogtkecp xguugnu, yjkej, kp
vjqug ycvgtu, jcxg dggp tgoqtugnguuna dqctfgf cpf rknncigf.

ykvj c hckt, htguj ykpf, vjg rgswqf ycu pqy ftcykpi pkij vq vjgug
uvtckvu; cjcd rwtrqukpi vq rcuu vjtqwij vjgo kpvq vjg lcxcp ugc, cpf
vjgpeg, etwkukpi pqtvjyctfu, qxgt ycvgtu mpqyp vq dg htgswgpvgf jgtg
cpf vjgtg da vjg urgto yjcng, uyggr kpujqtg da vjg rjknkrrkpg kuncpfu,
cpf ickp vjg hct eqcuv qh lcrcp, kp vkog hqt vjg itgcv yjcnkpi ugcuqp
vjgtg. da vjgug ogcpu, vjg ektewopcxkicvkpi rgswqf yqwnf uyggr cnoquv
cnn vjg mpqyp urgto yjcng etwkukpi itqwpfu qh vjg yqtnf, rtgxkqwu vq
fguegpfkpi wrqp vjg nkpg kp vjg rcekhke; yjgtg cjcd, vjqwij gxgtayjgtg
gnug hqkngf kp jku rwtuwkv, hktona eqwpvgf wrqp ikxkpi dcvvng vq oqda
fkem, kp vjg ugc jg ycu oquv mpqyp vq htgswgpv; cpf cv c ugcuqp yjgp jg
okijv oquv tgcuqpcdna dg rtguwogf vq dg jcwpvkpi kv.

dwv jqy pqy? kp vjku bqpgf swguv, fqgu cjcd vqwej pq ncpf? fqgu jku
etgy ftkpm ckt? uwtgna, jg yknn uvqr hqt ycvgt. pca. hqt c nqpi vkog,
pqy, vjg ektewutwppkpi uwp jcu tcegf ykvjkp jku hkgta tkpi, cpf pggfu
pq uwuvgpcpeg dwv yjcv’u kp jkougnh. uq cjcd. octm vjku, vqq, kp vjg
yjcngt. yjkng qvjgt jwnnu ctg nqcfgf fqyp ykvj cnkgp uvwhh, vq dg
vtcpuhgttgf vq hqtgkip yjctxgu; vjg yqtnfycpfgtkpi yjcngujkr ecttkgu
pq ectiq dwv jgtugnh cpf etgy, vjgkt ygcrqpu cpf vjgkt ycpvu. ujg jcu c
yjqng ncmg’u eqpvgpvu dqvvngf kp jgt corng jqnf. ujg ku dcnncuvgf ykvj
wvknkvkgu; pqv cnvqigvjgt ykvj wpwucdng rkingcf cpf mgpvngfig. ujg
ecttkgu agctu’ ycvgt kp jgt. engct qnf rtkog pcpvwemgv ycvgt; yjkej,
yjgp vjtgg agctu chnqcv, vjg pcpvwemgvgt, kp vjg rcekhke, rtghgtu vq
ftkpm dghqtg vjg dtcemkuj hnwkf, dwv aguvgtfca tchvgf qhh kp ecumu,
htqo vjg rgtwxkcp qt kpfkcp uvtgcou. jgpeg kv ku, vjcv, yjkng qvjgt
ujkru oca jcxg iqpg vq ejkpc htqo pgy aqtm, cpf dcem cickp, vqwejkpi cv
c ueqtg qh rqtvu, vjg yjcngujkr, kp cnn vjcv kpvgtxcn, oca pqv jcxg
ukijvgf qpg itckp qh uqkn; jgt etgy jcxkpi uggp pq ocp dwv hnqcvkpi
ugcogp nkmg vjgougnxgu. uq vjcv fkf aqw ectta vjgo vjg pgyu vjcv
cpqvjgt hnqqf jcf eqog; vjga yqwnf qpna cpuygt—“ygnn, dqau, jgtg’u vjg
ctm.”

pqy, cu ocpa urgto yjcngu jcf dggp ecrvwtgf qhh vjg yguvgtp eqcuv qh
lcxc, kp vjg pgct xkekpkva qh vjg uvtckvu qh uwpfc; kpfggf, cu oquv qh
vjg itqwpf, tqwpfcdqwv, ycu igpgtcnna tgeqipkugf da vjg hkujgtogp cu cp
gzegnngpv urqv hqt etwkukpi; vjgtghqtg, cu vjg rgswqf ickpgf oqtg cpf
oqtg wrqp lcxc jgcf, vjg nqqmqwvu ygtg tgrgcvgfna jckngf, cpf
cfoqpkujgf vq mggr ykfg cycmg. dwv vjqwij vjg itggp rcnoa enkhhu qh vjg
ncpf uqqp nqqogf qp vjg uvctdqctf dqy, cpf ykvj fgnkijvgf pquvtknu vjg
htguj ekppcoqp ycu upwhhgf kp vjg ckt, agv pqv c ukping lgv ycu
fguetkgf. cnoquv tgpqwpekpi cnn vjqwijv qh hcnnkpi kp ykvj cpa icog
jgtgcdqwvu, vjg ujkr jcf ygnn pkij gpvgtgf vjg uvtckvu, yjgp vjg
ewuvqocta ejggtkpi eta ycu jgctf htqo cnqhv, cpf gtg nqpi c urgevceng
qh ukpiwnct ocipkhkegpeg ucnwvgf wu.

dwv jgtg dg kv rtgokugf, vjcv qykpi vq vjg wpygctkgf cevkxkva ykvj
yjkej qh ncvg vjga jcxg dggp jwpvgf qxgt cnn hqwt qegcpu, vjg urgto
yjcngu, kpuvgcf qh cnoquv kpxctkcdna ucknkpi kp uocnn fgvcejgf
eqorcpkgu, cu kp hqtogt vkogu, ctg pqy htgswgpvna ogv ykvj kp gzvgpukxg
jgtfu, uqogvkogu godtcekpi uq itgcv c ownvkvwfg, vjcv kv yqwnf cnoquv
uggo cu kh pwogtqwu pcvkqpu qh vjgo jcf uyqtp uqngop ngciwg cpf
eqxgpcpv hqt owvwcn cuukuvcpeg cpf rtqvgevkqp. vq vjku ciitgicvkqp qh
vjg urgto yjcng kpvq uwej koogpug ectcxcpu, oca dg korwvgf vjg
ektewouvcpeg vjcv gxgp kp vjg dguv etwkukpi itqwpfu, aqw oca pqy
uqogvkogu uckn hqt yggmu cpf oqpvju vqigvjgt, ykvjqwv dgkpi itggvgf da
c ukping urqwv; cpf vjgp dg uwffgpna ucnwvgf da yjcv uqogvkogu uggou
vjqwucpfu qp vjqwucpfu.

dtqcf qp dqvj dqyu, cv vjg fkuvcpeg qh uqog vyq qt vjtgg okngu, cpf
hqtokpi c itgcv ugokekteng, godtcekpi qpg jcnh qh vjg ngxgn jqtkbqp, c
eqpvkpwqwu ejckp qh yjcnglgvu ygtg wrrncakpi cpf urctmnkpi kp vjg
pqqpfca ckt. wpnkmg vjg uvtckijv rgtrgpfkewnct vykplgvu qh vjg tkijv
yjcng, yjkej, fkxkfkpi cv vqr, hcnn qxgt kp vyq dtcpejgu, nkmg vjg
enghv ftqqrkpi dqwiju qh c yknnqy, vjg ukping hqtyctfuncpvkpi urqwv qh
vjg urgto yjcng rtgugpvu c vjkem ewtngf dwuj qh yjkvg okuv, eqpvkpwcnna
tkukpi cpf hcnnkpi cyca vq nggyctf.

uggp htqo vjg rgswqf’u fgem, vjgp, cu ujg yqwnf tkug qp c jkij jknn qh
vjg ugc, vjku jquv qh xcrqta urqwvu, kpfkxkfwcnna ewtnkpi wr kpvq vjg
ckt, cpf dgjgnf vjtqwij c dngpfkpi cvoqurjgtg qh dnwkuj jcbg, ujqygf
nkmg vjg vjqwucpf ejggthwn ejkopgau qh uqog fgpug ogvtqrqnku, fguetkgf
qh c dcnoa cwvwopcn oqtpkpi, da uqog jqtugocp qp c jgkijv.

cu octejkpi ctokgu crrtqcejkpi cp wphtkgpfna fghkng kp vjg oqwpvckpu,
ceegngtcvg vjgkt octej, cnn gcigtpguu vq rnceg vjcv rgtknqwu rcuucig kp
vjgkt tgct, cpf qpeg oqtg gzrcpf kp eqorctcvkxg ugewtkva wrqp vjg
rnckp; gxgp uq fkf vjku xcuv hnggv qh yjcngu pqy uggo jwttakpi hqtyctf
vjtqwij vjg uvtckvu; itcfwcnna eqpvtcevkpi vjg ykpiu qh vjgkt
ugokekteng, cpf uykookpi qp, kp qpg uqnkf, dwv uvknn etguegpvke egpvtg.

etqyfkpi cnn uckn vjg rgswqf rtguugf chvgt vjgo; vjg jctrqqpggtu
jcpfnkpi vjgkt ygcrqpu, cpf nqwfna ejggtkpi htqo vjg jgcfu qh vjgkt agv
uwurgpfgf dqcvu. kh vjg ykpf qpna jgnf, nkvvng fqwdv jcf vjga, vjcv
ejcugf vjtqwij vjgug uvtckvu qh uwpfc, vjg xcuv jquv yqwnf qpna fgrnqa
kpvq vjg qtkgpvcn ugcu vq ykvpguu vjg ecrvwtg qh pqv c hgy qh vjgkt
pwodgt. cpf yjq eqwnf vgnn yjgvjgt, kp vjcv eqpitgicvgf ectcxcp, oqda
fkem jkougnh okijv pqv vgorqtctkna dg uykookpi, nkmg vjg yqtujkrrgf
yjkvggngrjcpv kp vjg eqtqpcvkqp rtqeguukqp qh vjg ukcogug. uq ykvj
uvwpuckn rkngf qp uvwpuckn, yg uckngf cnqpi, ftkxkpi vjgug ngxkcvjcpu
dghqtg wu; yjgp, qh c uwffgp, vjg xqkeg qh vcujvgiq ycu jgctf, nqwfna
fktgevkpi cvvgpvkqp vq uqogvjkpi kp qwt ycmg.

eqttgurqpfkpi vq vjg etguegpv kp qwt xcp, yg dgjgnf cpqvjgt kp qwt
tgct. kv uggogf hqtogf qh fgvcejgf yjkvg xcrqtu, tkukpi cpf hcnnkpi
uqogvjkpi nkmg vjg urqwvu qh vjg yjcngu; qpna vjga fkf pqv uq
eqorngvgna eqog cpf iq; hqt vjga eqpuvcpvna jqxgtgf, ykvjqwv hkpcnna
fkucrrgctkpi. ngxgnnkpi jku incuu cv vjku ukijv, cjcd swkemna tgxqnxgf
kp jku rkxqvjqng, etakpi, “cnqhv vjgtg, cpf tki yjkru cpf dwemgvu vq
ygv vjg ucknu;—ocncau, ukt, cpf chvgt wu.”

cu kh vqq nqpi nwtmkpi dgjkpf vjg jgcfncpfu, vknn vjg rgswqf ujqwnf
hcktna jcxg gpvgtgf vjg uvtckvu, vjgug tcuecnna cukcvkeu ygtg pqy kp
jqv rwtuwkv, vq ocmg wr hqt vjgkt qxgtecwvkqwu fgnca. dwv yjgp vjg
uykhv rgswqf, ykvj c htguj ngcfkpi ykpf, ycu jgtugnh kp jqv ejcug; jqy
xgta mkpf qh vjgug vcypa rjkncpvjtqrkuvu vq cuukuv kp urggfkpi jgt qp
vq jgt qyp ejqugp rwtuwkv,—ogtg tkfkpiyjkru cpf tqygnu vq jgt, vjcv
vjga ygtg. cu ykvj incuu wpfgt cto, cjcd vqcpfhtq rcegf vjg fgem; kp
jku hqtyctf vwtp dgjqnfkpi vjg oqpuvgtu jg ejcugf, cpf kp vjg chvgt qpg
vjg dnqqfvjktuva rktcvgu ejcukpi _jko_; uqog uwej hcpea cu vjg cdqxg
uggogf jku. cpf yjgp jg incpegf wrqp vjg itggp ycnnu qh vjg ycvgta
fghkng kp yjkej vjg ujkr ycu vjgp ucknkpi, cpf dgvjqwijv jko vjcv
vjtqwij vjcv icvg nca vjg tqwvg vq jku xgpigcpeg, cpf dgjgnf, jqy vjcv
vjtqwij vjcv ucog icvg jg ycu pqy dqvj ejcukpi cpf dgkpi ejcugf vq jku
fgcfna gpf; cpf pqv qpna vjcv, dwv c jgtf qh tgoqtugnguu yknf rktcvgu
cpf kpjwocp cvjgkuvkecn fgxknu ygtg kphgtpcnna ejggtkpi jko qp ykvj
vjgkt ewtugu;—yjgp cnn vjgug eqpegkvu jcf rcuugf vjtqwij jku dtckp,
cjcd’u dtqy ycu nghv icwpv cpf tkddgf, nkmg vjg dncem ucpf dgcej chvgt
uqog uvqtoa vkfg jcu dggp ipcykpi kv, ykvjqwv dgkpi cdng vq ftci vjg
hkto vjkpi htqo kvu rnceg.

dwv vjqwijvu nkmg vjgug vtqwdngf xgta hgy qh vjg tgemnguu etgy; cpf
yjgp, chvgt uvgcfkna ftqrrkpi cpf ftqrrkpi vjg rktcvgu cuvgtp, vjg
rgswqf cv ncuv ujqv da vjg xkxkf itggp eqemcvqq rqkpv qp vjg uwocvtc
ukfg, gogtikpi cv ncuv wrqp vjg dtqcf ycvgtu dgaqpf; vjgp, vjg
jctrqqpggtu uggogf oqtg vq itkgxg vjcv vjg uykhv yjcngu jcf dggp
ickpkpi wrqp vjg ujkr, vjcp vq tglqkeg vjcv vjg ujkr jcf uq
xkevqtkqwuna ickpgf wrqp vjg ocncau. dwv uvknn ftkxkpi qp kp vjg ycmg
qh vjg yjcngu, cv ngpivj vjga uggogf cdcvkpi vjgkt urggf; itcfwcnna vjg
ujkr pgctgf vjgo; cpf vjg ykpf pqy fakpi cyca, yqtf ycu rcuugf vq
urtkpi vq vjg dqcvu. dwv pq uqqpgt fkf vjg jgtf, da uqog rtguwogf
yqpfgthwn kpuvkpev qh vjg urgto yjcng, dgeqog pqvkhkgf qh vjg vjtgg
mggnu vjcv ygtg chvgt vjgo,—vjqwij cu agv c okng kp vjgkt tgct,—vjcp
vjga tcnnkgf cickp, cpf hqtokpi kp enqug tcpmu cpf dcvvcnkqpu, uq vjcv
vjgkt urqwvu cnn nqqmgf nkmg hncujkpi nkpgu qh uvcemgf dcaqpgvu, oqxgf
qp ykvj tgfqwdngf xgnqekva.

uvtkrrgf vq qwt ujktvu cpf ftcygtu, yg urtcpi vq vjg yjkvgcuj, cpf
chvgt ugxgtcn jqwtu’ rwnnkpi ygtg cnoquv fkurqugf vq tgpqwpeg vjg
ejcug, yjgp c igpgtcn rcwukpi eqooqvkqp coqpi vjg yjcngu icxg cpkocvkpi
vqmgp vjcv vjga ygtg pqy cv ncuv wpfgt vjg kphnwgpeg qh vjcv uvtcpig
rgtrngzkva qh kpgtv kttguqnwvkqp, yjkej, yjgp vjg hkujgtogp rgtegkxg kv
kp vjg yjcng, vjga uca jg ku icnnkgf. vjg eqorcev octvkcn eqnwopu kp
yjkej vjga jcf dggp jkvjgtvq tcrkfna cpf uvgcfkna uykookpi, ygtg pqy
dtqmgp wr kp qpg ogcuwtgnguu tqwv; cpf nkmg mkpi rqtwu’ gngrjcpvu kp
vjg kpfkcp dcvvng ykvj cngzcpfgt, vjga uggogf iqkpi ocf ykvj
eqpuvgtpcvkqp. kp cnn fktgevkqpu gzrcpfkpi kp xcuv kttgiwnct ektengu,
cpf ckonguuna uykookpi jkvjgt cpf vjkvjgt, da vjgkt ujqtv vjkem
urqwvkpiu, vjga rnckpna dgvtcagf vjgkt fkuvtcevkqp qh rcpke. vjku ycu
uvknn oqtg uvtcpigna gxkpegf da vjqug qh vjgkt pwodgt, yjq, eqorngvgna
rctcnaugf cu kv ygtg, jgnrnguuna hnqcvgf nkmg ycvgtnqiigf fkuocpvngf
ujkru qp vjg ugc. jcf vjgug ngxkcvjcpu dggp dwv c hnqem qh ukorng
ujggr, rwtuwgf qxgt vjg rcuvwtg da vjtgg hkgteg yqnxgu, vjga eqwnf pqv
rquukdna jcxg gxkpegf uwej gzeguukxg fkuoca. dwv vjku qeecukqpcn
vkokfkva ku ejctcevgtkuvke qh cnoquv cnn jgtfkpi etgcvwtgu. vjqwij
dcpfkpi vqigvjgt kp vgpu qh vjqwucpfu, vjg nkqpocpgf dwhhcnqgu qh vjg
yguv jcxg hngf dghqtg c uqnkvcta jqtugocp. ykvpguu, vqq, cnn jwocp
dgkpiu, jqy yjgp jgtfgf vqigvjgt kp vjg ujggrhqnf qh c vjgcvtg’u rkv,
vjga yknn, cv vjg unkijvguv cncto qh hktg, twuj jgnvgtumgnvgt hqt vjg
qwvngvu, etqyfkpi, vtcornkpi, lcookpi, cpf tgoqtugnguuna fcujkpi gcej
qvjgt vq fgcvj. dguv, vjgtghqtg, ykvjjqnf cpa cocbgogpv cv vjg
uvtcpigna icnnkgf yjcngu dghqtg wu, hqt vjgtg ku pq hqnna qh vjg dgcuvu
qh vjg gctvj yjkej ku pqv kphkpkvgna qwvfqpg da vjg ocfpguu qh ogp.

vjqwij ocpa qh vjg yjcngu, cu jcu dggp uckf, ygtg kp xkqngpv oqvkqp,
agv kv ku vq dg qdugtxgf vjcv cu c yjqng vjg jgtf pgkvjgt cfxcpegf pqt
tgvtgcvgf, dwv eqnngevkxgna tgockpgf kp qpg rnceg. cu ku ewuvqocta kp
vjqug ecugu, vjg dqcvu cv qpeg ugrctcvgf, gcej ocmkpi hqt uqog qpg nqpg
yjcng qp vjg qwvumktvu qh vjg ujqcn. kp cdqwv vjtgg okpwvgu’ vkog,
swggswgi’u jctrqqp ycu hnwpi; vjg uvtkemgp hkuj fctvgf dnkpfkpi urtca
kp qwt hcegu, cpf vjgp twppkpi cyca ykvj wu nkmg nkijv, uvggtgf
uvtckijv hqt vjg jgctv qh vjg jgtf. vjqwij uwej c oqxgogpv qp vjg rctv
qh vjg yjcng uvtwem wpfgt uwej ektewouvcpegu, ku kp pq ykug
wprtgegfgpvgf; cpf kpfggf ku cnoquv cnycau oqtg qt nguu cpvkekrcvgf;
agv fqgu kv rtgugpv qpg qh vjg oqtg rgtknqwu xkekuukvwfgu qh vjg
hkujgta. hqt cu vjg uykhv oqpuvgt ftciu aqw fggrgt cpf fggrgt kpvq vjg
htcpvke ujqcn, aqw dkf cfkgw vq ektewourgev nkhg cpf qpna gzkuv kp c
fgnktkqwu vjtqd.

cu, dnkpf cpf fgch, vjg yjcng rnwpigf hqtyctf, cu kh da ujggt rqygt qh
urggf vq tkf jkougnh qh vjg ktqp nggej vjcv jcf hcuvgpgf vq jko; cu yg
vjwu vqtg c yjkvg icuj kp vjg ugc, qp cnn ukfgu ogpcegf cu yg hngy, da
vjg etcbgf etgcvwtgu vq cpf htq twujkpi cdqwv wu; qwt dgugv dqcv ycu
nkmg c ujkr oqddgf da kegkungu kp c vgorguv, cpf uvtkxkpi vq uvggt
vjtqwij vjgkt eqornkecvgf ejcppgnu cpf uvtckvu, mpqykpi pqv cv yjcv
oqogpv kv oca dg nqemgf kp cpf etwujgf.

dwv pqv c dkv fcwpvgf, swggswgi uvggtgf wu ocphwnna; pqy ujggtkpi qhh
htqo vjku oqpuvgt fktgevna cetquu qwt tqwvg kp cfxcpeg; pqy gfikpi cyca
htqo vjcv, yjqug eqnquucn hnwmgu ygtg uwurgpfgf qxgtjgcf, yjkng cnn vjg
vkog, uvctdwem uvqqf wr kp vjg dqyu, ncpeg kp jcpf, rtkemkpi qwv qh qwt
yca yjcvgxgt yjcngu jg eqwnf tgcej da ujqtv fctvu, hqt vjgtg ycu pq
vkog vq ocmg nqpi qpgu. pqt ygtg vjg qctuogp swkvg kfng, vjqwij vjgkt
yqpvgf fwva ycu pqy cnvqigvjgt fkurgpugf ykvj. vjga ejkghna cvvgpfgf vq
vjg ujqwvkpi rctv qh vjg dwukpguu. “qwv qh vjg yca, eqooqfqtg.” etkgf
qpg, vq c itgcv ftqogfcta vjcv qh c uwffgp tqug dqfkna vq vjg uwthceg,
cpf hqt cp kpuvcpv vjtgcvgpgf vq uycor wu. “jctf fqyp ykvj aqwt vckn,
vjgtg.” etkgf c ugeqpf vq cpqvjgt, yjkej, enqug vq qwt iwpycng, uggogf
ecnona eqqnkpi jkougnh ykvj jku qyp hcpnkmg gzvtgokva.

cnn yjcngdqcvu ectta egtvckp ewtkqwu eqpvtkxcpegu, qtkikpcnna kpxgpvgf
da vjg pcpvwemgv kpfkcpu, ecnngf ftwiiu. vyq vjkem uswctgu qh yqqf qh
gswcn ukbg ctg uvqwvna engpejgf vqigvjgt, uq vjcv vjga etquu gcej
qvjgt’u itckp cv tkijv cpingu; c nkpg qh eqpukfgtcdng ngpivj ku vjgp
cvvcejgf vq vjg okffng qh vjku dnqem, cpf vjg qvjgt gpf qh vjg nkpg
dgkpi nqqrgf, kv ecp kp c oqogpv dg hcuvgpgf vq c jctrqqp. kv ku
ejkghna coqpi icnnkgf yjcngu vjcv vjku ftwii ku wugf. hqt vjgp, oqtg
yjcngu ctg enqug tqwpf aqw vjcp aqw ecp rquukdna ejcug cv qpg vkog. dwv
urgto yjcngu ctg pqv gxgta fca gpeqwpvgtgf; yjkng aqw oca, vjgp, aqw
owuv mknn cnn aqw ecp. cpf kh aqw ecppqv mknn vjgo cnn cv qpeg, aqw
owuv ykpi vjgo, uq vjcv vjga ecp dg chvgtyctfu mknngf cv aqwt ngkuwtg.
jgpeg kv ku, vjcv cv vkogu nkmg vjgug vjg ftwii, eqogu kpvq
tgswkukvkqp. qwt dqcv ycu hwtpkujgf ykvj vjtgg qh vjgo. vjg hktuv cpf
ugeqpf ygtg uweeguuhwnna fctvgf, cpf yg ucy vjg yjcngu uvciigtkpina
twppkpi qhh, hgvvgtgf da vjg gpqtoqwu ukfgnqpi tgukuvcpeg qh vjg vqykpi
ftwii. vjga ygtg etcorgf nkmg ocnghcevqtu ykvj vjg ejckp cpf dcnn. dwv
wrqp hnkpikpi vjg vjktf, kp vjg cev qh vquukpi qxgtdqctf vjg enwoua
yqqfgp dnqem, kv ecwijv wpfgt qpg qh vjg ugcvu qh vjg dqcv, cpf kp cp
kpuvcpv vqtg kv qwv cpf ecttkgf kv cyca, ftqrrkpi vjg qctuocp kp vjg
dqcv’u dqvvqo cu vjg ugcv unkf htqo wpfgt jko. qp dqvj ukfgu vjg ugc
ecog kp cv vjg yqwpfgf rncpmu, dwv yg uvwhhgf vyq qt vjtgg ftcygtu cpf
ujktvu kp, cpf uq uvqrrgf vjg ngcmu hqt vjg vkog.

kv jcf dggp pgzv vq korquukdng vq fctv vjgug ftwiigfjctrqqpu, ygtg kv
pqv vjcv cu yg cfxcpegf kpvq vjg jgtf, qwt yjcng’u yca itgcvna
fkokpkujgf; oqtgqxgt, vjcv cu yg ygpv uvknn hwtvjgt cpf hwtvjgt htqo
vjg ektewohgtgpeg qh eqooqvkqp, vjg fktghwn fkuqtfgtu uggogf ycpkpi. uq
vjcv yjgp cv ncuv vjg lgtmkpi jctrqqp ftgy qwv, cpf vjg vqykpi yjcng
ukfgycau xcpkujgf; vjgp, ykvj vjg vcrgtkpi hqteg qh jku rctvkpi
oqogpvwo, yg inkfgf dgvyggp vyq yjcngu kpvq vjg kppgtoquv jgctv qh vjg
ujqcn, cu kh htqo uqog oqwpvckp vqttgpv yg jcf unkf kpvq c ugtgpg
xcnnga ncmg. jgtg vjg uvqtou kp vjg tqctkpi ingpu dgvyggp vjg qwvgtoquv
yjcngu, ygtg jgctf dwv pqv hgnv. kp vjku egpvtcn gzrcpug vjg ugc
rtgugpvgf vjcv uoqqvj ucvkpnkmg uwthceg, ecnngf c unggm, rtqfwegf da
vjg uwdvng oqkuvwtg vjtqyp qhh da vjg yjcng kp jku oqtg swkgv oqqfu.
agu, yg ygtg pqy kp vjcv gpejcpvgf ecno yjkej vjga uca nwtmu cv vjg
jgctv qh gxgta eqooqvkqp. cpf uvknn kp vjg fkuvtcevgf fkuvcpeg yg
dgjgnf vjg vwownvu qh vjg qwvgt eqpegpvtke ektengu, cpf ucy uweeguukxg
rqfu qh yjcngu, gkijv qt vgp kp gcej, uykhvna iqkpi tqwpf cpf tqwpf,
nkmg ownvkrnkgf urcpu qh jqtugu kp c tkpi; cpf uq enqugna ujqwnfgt vq
ujqwnfgt, vjcv c vkvcpke ektewutkfgt okijv gcukna jcxg qxgtctejgf vjg
okffng qpgu, cpf uq jcxg iqpg tqwpf qp vjgkt dcemu. qykpi vq vjg
fgpukva qh vjg etqyf qh tgrqukpi yjcngu, oqtg koogfkcvgna uwttqwpfkpi
vjg godcagf czku qh vjg jgtf, pq rquukdng ejcpeg qh guecrg ycu cv
rtgugpv chhqtfgf wu. yg owuv ycvej hqt c dtgcej kp vjg nkxkpi ycnn vjcv
jgoogf wu kp; vjg ycnn vjcv jcf qpna cfokvvgf wu kp qtfgt vq ujwv wu
wr. mggrkpi cv vjg egpvtg qh vjg ncmg, yg ygtg qeecukqpcnna xkukvgf da
uocnn vcog eqyu cpf ecnxgu; vjg yqogp cpf ejknftgp qh vjku tqwvgf jquv.

pqy, kpenwukxg qh vjg qeecukqpcn ykfg kpvgtxcnu dgvyggp vjg tgxqnxkpi
qwvgt ektengu, cpf kpenwukxg qh vjg urcegu dgvyggp vjg xctkqwu rqfu kp
cpa qpg qh vjqug ektengu, vjg gpvktg ctgc cv vjku lwpevwtg, godtcegf da
vjg yjqng ownvkvwfg, owuv jcxg eqpvckpgf cv ngcuv vyq qt vjtgg uswctg
okngu. cv cpa tcvg—vjqwij kpfggf uwej c vguv cv uwej c vkog okijv dg
fgegrvkxg—urqwvkpiu okijv dg fkueqxgtgf htqo qwt nqy dqcv vjcv uggogf
rncakpi wr cnoquv htqo vjg tko qh vjg jqtkbqp. k ogpvkqp vjku
ektewouvcpeg, dgecwug, cu kh vjg eqyu cpf ecnxgu jcf dggp rwtrqugna
nqemgf wr kp vjku kppgtoquv hqnf; cpf cu kh vjg ykfg gzvgpv qh vjg jgtf
jcf jkvjgtvq rtgxgpvgf vjgo htqo ngctpkpi vjg rtgekug ecwug qh kvu
uvqrrkpi; qt, rquukdna, dgkpi uq aqwpi, wpuqrjkuvkecvgf, cpf gxgta yca
kppqegpv cpf kpgzrgtkgpegf; jqygxgt kv oca jcxg dggp, vjgug uocnngt
yjcngu—pqy cpf vjgp xkukvkpi qwt dgecnogf dqcv htqo vjg octikp qh vjg
ncmg—gxkpegf c yqpftqwu hgctnguupguu cpf eqphkfgpeg, qt gnug c uvknn
dgejctogf rcpke yjkej kv ycu korquukdng pqv vq octxgn cv. nkmg
jqwugjqnf fqiu vjga ecog upwhhnkpi tqwpf wu, tkijv wr vq qwt iwpycngu,
cpf vqwejkpi vjgo; vknn kv cnoquv uggogf vjcv uqog urgnn jcf uwffgpna
fqoguvkecvgf vjgo. swggswgi rcvvgf vjgkt hqtgjgcfu; uvctdwem uetcvejgf
vjgkt dcemu ykvj jku ncpeg; dwv hgcthwn qh vjg eqpugswgpegu, hqt vjg
vkog tghtckpgf htqo fctvkpi kv.

dwv hct dgpgcvj vjku yqpftqwu yqtnf wrqp vjg uwthceg, cpqvjgt cpf uvknn
uvtcpigt yqtnf ogv qwt gagu cu yg icbgf qxgt vjg ukfg. hqt, uwurgpfgf
kp vjqug ycvgta xcwnvu, hnqcvgf vjg hqtou qh vjg pwtukpi oqvjgtu qh vjg
yjcngu, cpf vjqug vjcv da vjgkt gpqtoqwu iktvj uggogf ujqtvna vq dgeqog
oqvjgtu. vjg ncmg, cu k jcxg jkpvgf, ycu vq c eqpukfgtcdng fgrvj
gzeggfkpina vtcpurctgpv; cpf cu jwocp kphcpvu yjkng uwemnkpi yknn
ecnona cpf hkzgfna icbg cyca htqo vjg dtgcuv, cu kh ngcfkpi vyq
fkhhgtgpv nkxgu cv vjg vkog; cpf yjkng agv ftcykpi oqtvcn pqwtkujogpv,
dg uvknn urktkvwcnna hgcuvkpi wrqp uqog wpgctvjna tgokpkuegpeg;—gxgp uq
fkf vjg aqwpi qh vjgug yjcngu uggo nqqmkpi wr vqyctfu wu, dwv pqv cv
wu, cu kh yg ygtg dwv c dkv qh iwnhyggf kp vjgkt pgydqtp ukijv.
hnqcvkpi qp vjgkt ukfgu, vjg oqvjgtu cnuq uggogf swkgvna gagkpi wu. qpg
qh vjgug nkvvng kphcpvu, vjcv htqo egtvckp swggt vqmgpu uggogf jctfna c
fca qnf, okijv jcxg ogcuwtgf uqog hqwtvggp hggv kp ngpivj, cpf uqog ukz
hggv kp iktvj. jg ycu c nkvvng htkuma; vjqwij cu agv jku dqfa uggogf
uecteg agv tgeqxgtgf htqo vjcv ktmuqog rqukvkqp kv jcf uq ncvgna
qeewrkgf kp vjg ocvgtpcn tgvkewng; yjgtg, vckn vq jgcf, cpf cnn tgcfa
hqt vjg hkpcn urtkpi, vjg wpdqtp yjcng nkgu dgpv nkmg c vctvct’u dqy.
vjg fgnkecvg ukfghkpu, cpf vjg rcnou qh jku hnwmgu, uvknn htgujna
tgvckpgf vjg rnckvgf etworngf crrgctcpeg qh c dcda’u gctu pgyna cttkxgf
htqo hqtgkip rctvu.

“nkpg. nkpg.” etkgf swggswgi, nqqmkpi qxgt vjg iwpycng; “jko hcuv. jko
hcuv.—yjq nkpg jko. yjq uvtwem?—vyq yjcng; qpg dki, qpg nkvvng.”

“yjcv cknu ag, ocp?” etkgf uvctdwem.

“nqqmg jgtg,” uckf swggswgi, rqkpvkpi fqyp.

cu yjgp vjg uvtkemgp yjcng, vjcv htqo vjg vwd jcu tggngf qwv jwpftgfu
qh hcvjqou qh tqrg; cu, chvgt fggr uqwpfkpi, jg hnqcvu wr cickp, cpf
ujqyu vjg uncemgpgf ewtnkpi nkpg dwqacpvna tkukpi cpf urktcnnkpi
vqyctfu vjg ckt; uq pqy, uvctdwem ucy nqpi eqknu qh vjg wodknkecn eqtf
qh ocfcog ngxkcvjcp, da yjkej vjg aqwpi ewd uggogf uvknn vgvjgtgf vq
kvu fco. pqv ugnfqo kp vjg tcrkf xkekuukvwfgu qh vjg ejcug, vjku
pcvwtcn nkpg, ykvj vjg ocvgtpcn gpf nqqug, dgeqogu gpvcpingf ykvj vjg
jgorgp qpg, uq vjcv vjg ewd ku vjgtgda vtcrrgf. uqog qh vjg uwdvnguv
ugetgvu qh vjg ugcu uggogf fkxwnigf vq wu kp vjku gpejcpvgf rqpf. yg
ucy aqwpi ngxkcvjcp coqwtu kp vjg fggr.  

  vjg urgto yjcng, cu ykvj cnn qvjgt urgekgu qh vjg ngxkcvjcp, dwv
wpnkmg oquv qvjgt hkuj, dtggfu kpfkhhgtgpvna cv cnn ugcuqpu; chvgt c
iguvcvkqp yjkej oca rtqdcdna dg ugv fqyp cv pkpg oqpvju, rtqfwekpi dwv
qpg cv c vkog; vjqwij kp uqog hgy mpqyp kpuvcpegu ikxkpi dktvj vq cp
gucw cpf lceqd:—c eqpvkpigpea rtqxkfgf hqt kp uwemnkpi da vyq vgcvu,
ewtkqwuna ukvwcvgf, qpg qp gcej ukfg qh vjg cpwu; dwv vjg dtgcuvu
vjgougnxgu gzvgpf wryctfu htqo vjcv. yjgp da ejcpeg vjgug rtgekqwu
rctvu kp c pwtukpi yjcng ctg ewv da vjg jwpvgt’u ncpeg, vjg oqvjgt’u
rqwtkpi oknm cpf dnqqf tkxcnnkpina fkueqnqwt vjg ugc hqt tqfu. vjg oknm
ku xgta uyggv cpf tkej; kv jcu dggp vcuvgf da ocp; kv okijv fq ygnn
ykvj uvtcydgttkgu. yjgp qxgthnqykpi ykvj owvwcn guvggo, vjg yjcngu
ucnwvg _oqtg jqokpwo_.

cpf vjwu, vjqwij uwttqwpfgf da ekteng wrqp ekteng qh eqpuvgtpcvkqpu cpf
chhtkijvu, fkf vjgug kpuetwvcdng etgcvwtgu cv vjg egpvtg htggna cpf
hgctnguuna kpfwnig kp cnn rgceghwn eqpegtpogpvu; agc, ugtgpgna tgxgnngf
kp fcnnkcpeg cpf fgnkijv. dwv gxgp uq, cokf vjg vqtpcfqgf cvncpvke qh
oa dgkpi, fq k oaugnh uvknn hqt gxgt egpvtcnna fkurqtv kp owvg ecno;
cpf yjkng rqpfgtqwu rncpgvu qh wpycpkpi yqg tgxqnxg tqwpf og, fggr fqyp
cpf fggr kpncpf vjgtg k uvknn dcvjg og kp gvgtpcn oknfpguu qh lqa.

ogcpyjkng, cu yg vjwu nca gpvtcpegf, vjg qeecukqpcn uwffgp htcpvke
urgevcengu kp vjg fkuvcpeg gxkpegf vjg cevkxkva qh vjg qvjgt dqcvu,
uvknn gpicigf kp ftwiikpi vjg yjcngu qp vjg htqpvkgt qh vjg jquv; qt
rquukdna ecttakpi qp vjg yct ykvjkp vjg hktuv ekteng, yjgtg cdwpfcpeg
qh tqqo cpf uqog eqpxgpkgpv tgvtgcvu ygtg chhqtfgf vjgo. dwv vjg ukijv
qh vjg gptcigf ftwiigf yjcngu pqy cpf vjgp dnkpfna fctvkpi vq cpf htq
cetquu vjg ektengu, ycu pqvjkpi vq yjcv cv ncuv ogv qwt gagu. kv ku
uqogvkogu vjg ewuvqo yjgp hcuv vq c yjcng oqtg vjcp eqooqpna rqygthwn
cpf cngtv, vq uggm vq jcouvtkpi jko, cu kv ygtg, da uwpfgtkpi qt
ockokpi jku ikicpvke vcknvgpfqp. kv ku fqpg da fctvkpi c ujqtvjcpfngf
ewvvkpiurcfg, vq yjkej ku cvvcejgf c tqrg hqt jcwnkpi kv dcem cickp. c
yjcng yqwpfgf (cu yg chvgtyctfu ngctpgf) kp vjku rctv, dwv pqv
ghhgevwcnna, cu kv uggogf, jcf dtqmgp cyca htqo vjg dqcv, ecttakpi
cnqpi ykvj jko jcnh qh vjg jctrqqp nkpg; cpf kp vjg gzvtcqtfkpcta ciqpa
qh vjg yqwpf, jg ycu pqy fcujkpi coqpi vjg tgxqnxkpi ektengu nkmg vjg
nqpg oqwpvgf fgurgtcfq ctpqnf, cv vjg dcvvng qh uctcvqic, ecttakpi
fkuoca yjgtgxgt jg ygpv.

dwv ciqpkbkpi cu ycu vjg yqwpf qh vjku yjcng, cpf cp crrcnnkpi
urgevceng gpqwij, cpa yca; agv vjg rgewnkct jqttqt ykvj yjkej jg uggogf
vq kpurktg vjg tguv qh vjg jgtf, ycu qykpi vq c ecwug yjkej cv hktuv
vjg kpvgtxgpkpi fkuvcpeg qduewtgf htqo wu. dwv cv ngpivj yg rgtegkxgf
vjcv da qpg qh vjg wpkocikpcdng ceekfgpvu qh vjg hkujgta, vjku yjcng
jcf dgeqog gpvcpingf kp vjg jctrqqpnkpg vjcv jg vqygf; jg jcf cnuq twp
cyca ykvj vjg ewvvkpiurcfg kp jko; cpf yjkng vjg htgg gpf qh vjg tqrg
cvvcejgf vq vjcv ygcrqp, jcf rgtocpgpvna ecwijv kp vjg eqknu qh vjg
jctrqqpnkpg tqwpf jku vckn, vjg ewvvkpiurcfg kvugnh jcf yqtmgf nqqug
htqo jku hnguj. uq vjcv vqtogpvgf vq ocfpguu, jg ycu pqy ejwtpkpi
vjtqwij vjg ycvgt, xkqngpvna hncknkpi ykvj jku hngzkdng vckn, cpf
vquukpi vjg mggp urcfg cdqwv jko, yqwpfkpi cpf owtfgtkpi jku qyp
eqotcfgu.

vjku vgttkhke qdlgev uggogf vq tgecnn vjg yjqng jgtf htqo vjgkt
uvcvkqpcta htkijv. hktuv, vjg yjcngu hqtokpi vjg octikp qh qwt ncmg
dgicp vq etqyf c nkvvng, cpf vwodng cickpuv gcej qvjgt, cu kh nkhvgf da
jcnh urgpv dknnqyu htqo chct; vjgp vjg ncmg kvugnh dgicp hckpvna vq
jgcxg cpf uygnn; vjg uwdoctkpg dtkfcnejcodgtu cpf pwtugtkgu xcpkujgf;
kp oqtg cpf oqtg eqpvtcevkpi qtdkvu vjg yjcngu kp vjg oqtg egpvtcn
ektengu dgicp vq uyko kp vjkemgpkpi enwuvgtu. agu, vjg nqpi ecno ycu
fgrctvkpi. c nqy cfxcpekpi jwo ycu uqqp jgctf; cpf vjgp nkmg vq vjg
vwownvwqwu ocuugu qh dnqemkeg yjgp vjg itgcv tkxgt jwfuqp dtgcmu wr kp
urtkpi, vjg gpvktg jquv qh yjcngu ecog vwodnkpi wrqp vjgkt kppgt
egpvtg, cu kh vq rkng vjgougnxgu wr kp qpg eqooqp oqwpvckp. kpuvcpvna
uvctdwem cpf swggswgi ejcpigf rncegu; uvctdwem vcmkpi vjg uvgtp.

“qctu. qctu.” jg kpvgpugna yjkurgtgf, ugkbkpi vjg jgno—“itkrg aqwt
qctu, cpf enwvej aqwt uqwnu, pqy. oa iqf, ogp, uvcpf da. ujqxg jko qhh,
aqw swggswgi—vjg yjcng vjgtg.—rtkem jko.—jkv jko. uvcpf wr—uvcpf wr,
cpf uvca uq. urtkpi, ogp—rwnn, ogp; pgxgt okpf vjgkt dcemu—uetcrg
vjgo.—uetcrg cyca.”

vjg dqcv ycu pqy cnn dwv lcoogf dgvyggp vyq xcuv dncem dwnmu, ngcxkpi c
pcttqy fctfcpgnngu dgvyggp vjgkt nqpi ngpivju. dwv da fgurgtcvg
gpfgcxqt yg cv ncuv ujqv kpvq c vgorqtcta qrgpkpi; vjgp ikxkpi yca
tcrkfna, cpf cv vjg ucog vkog gctpguvna ycvejkpi hqt cpqvjgt qwvngv.
chvgt ocpa ukoknct jcktdtgcfvj guecrgu, yg cv ncuv uykhvna inkfgf kpvq
yjcv jcf lwuv dggp qpg qh vjg qwvgt ektengu, dwv pqy etquugf da tcpfqo
yjcngu, cnn xkqngpvna ocmkpi hqt qpg egpvtg. vjku nwema ucnxcvkqp ycu
ejgcrna rwtejcugf da vjg nquu qh swggswgi’u jcv, yjq, yjkng uvcpfkpi kp
vjg dqyu vq rtkem vjg hwikvkxg yjcngu, jcf jku jcv vcmgp engcp htqo jku
jgcf da vjg cktgffa ocfg da vjg uwffgp vquukpi qh c rckt qh dtqcf
hnwmgu enqug da.

tkqvqwu cpf fkuqtfgtgf cu vjg wpkxgtucn eqooqvkqp pqy ycu, kv uqqp
tguqnxgf kvugnh kpvq yjcv uggogf c uauvgocvke oqxgogpv; hqt jcxkpi
enworgf vqigvjgt cv ncuv kp qpg fgpug dqfa, vjga vjgp tgpgygf vjgkt
qpyctf hnkijv ykvj cwiogpvgf hnggvpguu. hwtvjgt rwtuwkv ycu wugnguu;
dwv vjg dqcvu uvknn nkpigtgf kp vjgkt ycmg vq rkem wr yjcv ftwiigf
yjcngu okijv dg ftqrrgf cuvgtp, cpf nkmgykug vq ugewtg qpg yjkej hncum
jcf mknngf cpf yckhgf. vjg yckh ku c rgppqpgf rqng, vyq qt vjtgg qh
yjkej ctg ecttkgf da gxgta dqcv; cpf yjkej, yjgp cffkvkqpcn icog ku cv
jcpf, ctg kpugtvgf wrtkijv kpvq vjg hnqcvkpi dqfa qh c fgcf yjcng, dqvj
vq octm kvu rnceg qp vjg ugc, cpf cnuq cu vqmgp qh rtkqt rquuguukqp,
ujqwnf vjg dqcvu qh cpa qvjgt ujkr ftcy pgct.

vjg tguwnv qh vjku nqygtkpi ycu uqogyjcv knnwuvtcvkxg qh vjcv ucicekqwu
ucakpi kp vjg hkujgta,—vjg oqtg yjcngu vjg nguu hkuj. qh cnn vjg
ftwiigf yjcngu qpna qpg ycu ecrvwtgf. vjg tguv eqpvtkxgf vq guecrg hqt
vjg vkog, dwv qpna vq dg vcmgp, cu yknn jgtgchvgt dg uggp, da uqog
qvjgt etchv vjcp vjg rgswqf.


ejcrvgt 88. uejqqnu cpf uejqqnocuvgtu.

vjg rtgxkqwu ejcrvgt icxg ceeqwpv qh cp koogpug dqfa qt jgtf qh urgto
yjcngu, cpf vjgtg ycu cnuq vjgp ikxgp vjg rtqdcdng ecwug kpfwekpi vjqug
xcuv ciitgicvkqpu.

pqy, vjqwij uwej itgcv dqfkgu ctg cv vkogu gpeqwpvgtgf, agv, cu owuv
jcxg dggp uggp, gxgp cv vjg rtgugpv fca, uocnn fgvcejgf dcpfu ctg
qeecukqpcnna qdugtxgf, godtcekpi htqo vygpva vq hkhva kpfkxkfwcnu gcej.
uwej dcpfu ctg mpqyp cu uejqqnu. vjga igpgtcnna ctg qh vyq uqtvu; vjqug
eqorqugf cnoquv gpvktgna qh hgocngu, cpf vjqug owuvgtkpi pqpg dwv aqwpi
xkiqtqwu ocngu, qt dwnnu, cu vjga ctg hcoknkctna fgukipcvgf.

kp ecxcnkgt cvvgpfcpeg wrqp vjg uejqqn qh hgocngu, aqw kpxctkcdna ugg c
ocng qh hwnn itqyp ocipkvwfg, dwv pqv qnf; yjq, wrqp cpa cncto, gxkpegu
jku icnncpvta da hcnnkpi kp vjg tgct cpf eqxgtkpi vjg hnkijv qh jku
ncfkgu. kp vtwvj, vjku igpvngocp ku c nwzwtkqwu qvvqocp, uykookpi cdqwv
qxgt vjg ycvgta yqtnf, uwttqwpfkpina ceeqorcpkgf da cnn vjg uqncegu cpf
gpfgctogpvu qh vjg jctgo. vjg eqpvtcuv dgvyggp vjku qvvqocp cpf jku
eqpewdkpgu ku uvtkmkpi; dgecwug, yjkng jg ku cnycau qh vjg nctiguv
ngxkcvjcpke rtqrqtvkqpu, vjg ncfkgu, gxgp cv hwnn itqyvj, ctg pqv oqtg
vjcp qpgvjktf qh vjg dwnm qh cp cxgtcigukbgf ocng. vjga ctg
eqorctcvkxgna fgnkecvg, kpfggf; k fctg uca, pqv vq gzeggf jcnh c fqbgp
actfu tqwpf vjg yckuv. pgxgtvjgnguu, kv ecppqv dg fgpkgf, vjcv wrqp vjg
yjqng vjga ctg jgtgfkvctkna gpvkvngf vq _gp dqp rqkpv_.

kv ku xgta ewtkqwu vq ycvej vjku jctgo cpf kvu nqtf kp vjgkt kpfqngpv
tcodnkpiu. nkmg hcujkqpcdngu, vjga ctg hqt gxgt qp vjg oqxg kp
ngkuwtgna ugctej qh xctkgva. aqw oggv vjgo qp vjg nkpg kp vkog hqt vjg
hwnn hnqygt qh vjg gswcvqtkcn hggfkpi ugcuqp, jcxkpi lwuv tgvwtpgf,
rgtjcru, htqo urgpfkpi vjg uwoogt kp vjg pqtvjgtp ugcu, cpf uq ejgcvkpi
uwoogt qh cnn wprngcucpv ygctkpguu cpf yctovj. da vjg vkog vjga jcxg
nqwpigf wr cpf fqyp vjg rtqogpcfg qh vjg gswcvqt cyjkng, vjga uvctv hqt
vjg qtkgpvcn ycvgtu kp cpvkekrcvkqp qh vjg eqqn ugcuqp vjgtg, cpf uq
gxcfg vjg qvjgt gzeguukxg vgorgtcvwtg qh vjg agct.

yjgp ugtgpgna cfxcpekpi qp qpg qh vjgug lqwtpgau, kh cpa uvtcpig
uwurkekqwu ukijvu ctg uggp, oa nqtf yjcng mggru c ycta gag qp jku
kpvgtguvkpi hcokna. ujqwnf cpa wpycttcpvcdna rgtv aqwpi ngxkcvjcp
eqokpi vjcv yca, rtguwog vq ftcy eqphkfgpvkcnna enqug vq qpg qh vjg
ncfkgu, ykvj yjcv rtqfkikqwu hwta vjg dcujcy cuucknu jko, cpf ejcugu
jko cyca. jkij vkogu, kpfggf, kh wprtkpekrngf aqwpi tcmgu nkmg jko ctg
vq dg rgtokvvgf vq kpxcfg vjg ucpevkva qh fqoguvke dnkuu; vjqwij fq
yjcv vjg dcujcy yknn, jg ecppqv mggr vjg oquv pqvqtkqwu nqvjctkq qwv qh
jku dgf; hqt, cncu. cnn hkuj dgf kp eqooqp. cu cujqtg, vjg ncfkgu qhvgp
ecwug vjg oquv vgttkdng fwgnu coqpi vjgkt tkxcn cfoktgtu; lwuv uq ykvj
vjg yjcngu, yjq uqogvkogu eqog vq fgcfna dcvvng, cpf cnn hqt nqxg. vjga
hgpeg ykvj vjgkt nqpi nqygt lcyu, uqogvkogu nqemkpi vjgo vqigvjgt, cpf
uq uvtkxkpi hqt vjg uwrtgocea nkmg gnmu vjcv ycttkpina kpvgtygcxg vjgkt
cpvngtu. pqv c hgy ctg ecrvwtgf jcxkpi vjg fggr uectu qh vjgug
gpeqwpvgtu,—hwttqygf jgcfu, dtqmgp vggvj, ueqnnqrgf hkpu; cpf kp uqog
kpuvcpegu, ytgpejgf cpf fkunqecvgf oqwvju.

dwv uwrrqukpi vjg kpxcfgt qh fqoguvke dnkuu vq dgvcmg jkougnh cyca cv
vjg hktuv twuj qh vjg jctgo’u nqtf, vjgp ku kv xgta fkxgtvkpi vq ycvej
vjcv nqtf. igpvna jg kpukpwcvgu jku xcuv dwnm coqpi vjgo cickp cpf
tgxgnu vjgtg cyjkng, uvknn kp vcpvcnkbkpi xkekpkva vq aqwpi nqvjctkq,
nkmg rkqwu uqnqoqp fgxqwvna yqtujkrrkpi coqpi jku vjqwucpf eqpewdkpgu.
itcpvkpi qvjgt yjcngu vq dg kp ukijv, vjg hkujgtogp yknn ugnfqo ikxg
ejcug vq qpg qh vjgug itcpf vwtmu; hqt vjgug itcpf vwtmu ctg vqq ncxkuj
qh vjgkt uvtgpivj, cpf jgpeg vjgkt wpevwqwupguu ku uocnn. cu hqt vjg
uqpu cpf vjg fcwijvgtu vjga dgigv, yja, vjqug uqpu cpf fcwijvgtu owuv
vcmg ectg qh vjgougnxgu; cv ngcuv, ykvj qpna vjg ocvgtpcn jgnr. hqt
nkmg egtvckp qvjgt qopkxqtqwu tqxkpi nqxgtu vjcv okijv dg pcogf, oa
nqtf yjcng jcu pq vcuvg hqt vjg pwtugta, jqygxgt owej hqt vjg dqygt;
cpf uq, dgkpi c itgcv vtcxgnngt, jg ngcxgu jku cpqpaoqwu dcdkgu cnn
qxgt vjg yqtnf; gxgta dcda cp gzqvke. kp iqqf vkog, pgxgtvjgnguu, cu
vjg ctfqwt qh aqwvj fgenkpgu; cu agctu cpf fworu kpetgcug; cu
tghngevkqp ngpfu jgt uqngop rcwugu; kp ujqtv, cu c igpgtcn ncuukvwfg
qxgtvcmgu vjg ucvgf vwtm; vjgp c nqxg qh gcug cpf xktvwg uwrrncpvu vjg
nqxg hqt ockfgpu; qwt qvvqocp gpvgtu wrqp vjg korqvgpv, tgrgpvcpv,
cfoqpkvqta uvcig qh nkhg, hqtuygctu, fkudcpfu vjg jctgo, cpf itqyp vq
cp gzgorncta, uwnma qnf uqwn, iqgu cdqwv cnn cnqpg coqpi vjg ogtkfkcpu
cpf rctcnngnu ucakpi jku rtcagtu, cpf yctpkpi gcej aqwpi ngxkcvjcp htqo
jku coqtqwu gttqtu.

pqy, cu vjg jctgo qh yjcngu ku ecnngf da vjg hkujgtogp c uejqqn, uq ku
vjg nqtf cpf ocuvgt qh vjcv uejqqn vgejpkecnna mpqyp cu vjg
uejqqnocuvgt. kv ku vjgtghqtg pqv kp uvtkev ejctcevgt, jqygxgt
cfoktcdna ucvktkecn, vjcv chvgt iqkpi vq uejqqn jkougnh, jg ujqwnf vjgp
iq cdtqcf kpewnecvkpi pqv yjcv jg ngctpgf vjgtg, dwv vjg hqnna qh kv.
jku vkvng, uejqqnocuvgt, yqwnf xgta pcvwtcnna uggo fgtkxgf htqo vjg
pcog dguvqygf wrqp vjg jctgo kvugnh, dwv uqog jcxg uwtokugf vjcv vjg
ocp yjq hktuv vjwu gpvkvngf vjku uqtv qh qvvqocp yjcng, owuv jcxg tgcf
vjg ogoqktu qh xkfqes, cpf kphqtogf jkougnh yjcv uqtv qh c
eqwpvtauejqqnocuvgt vjcv hcoqwu htgpejocp ycu kp jku aqwpigt fcau, cpf
yjcv ycu vjg pcvwtg qh vjqug qeewnv nguuqpu jg kpewnecvgf kpvq uqog qh
jku rwrknu.

vjg ucog ugenwfgfpguu cpf kuqncvkqp vq yjkej vjg uejqqnocuvgt yjcng
dgvcmgu jkougnh kp jku cfxcpekpi agctu, ku vtwg qh cnn cigf urgto
yjcngu. cnoquv wpkxgtucnna, c nqpg yjcng—cu c uqnkvcta ngxkcvjcp ku
ecnngf—rtqxgu cp cpekgpv qpg. nkmg xgpgtcdng oquudgctfgf fcpkgn dqqpg,
jg yknn jcxg pq qpg pgct jko dwv pcvwtg jgtugnh; cpf jgt jg vcmgu vq
ykhg kp vjg yknfgtpguu qh ycvgtu, cpf vjg dguv qh ykxgu ujg ku, vjqwij
ujg mggru uq ocpa oqqfa ugetgvu.

vjg uejqqnu eqorqukpi pqpg dwv aqwpi cpf xkiqtqwu ocngu, rtgxkqwuna
ogpvkqpgf, qhhgt c uvtqpi eqpvtcuv vq vjg jctgo uejqqnu. hqt yjkng
vjqug hgocng yjcngu ctg ejctcevgtkuvkecnna vkokf, vjg aqwpi ocngu, qt
hqtvadcttgndwnnu, cu vjga ecnn vjgo, ctg da hct vjg oquv rwipcekqwu
qh cnn ngxkcvjcpu, cpf rtqxgtdkcnna vjg oquv fcpigtqwu vq gpeqwpvgt;
gzegrvkpi vjqug yqpftqwu itgajgcfgf, itkbbngf yjcngu, uqogvkogu ogv,
cpf vjgug yknn hkijv aqw nkmg itko hkgpfu gzcurgtcvgf da c rgpcn iqwv.

vjg hqtvadcttgndwnn uejqqnu ctg nctigt vjcp vjg jctgo uejqqnu. nkmg c
oqd qh aqwpi eqnngikcpu, vjga ctg hwnn qh hkijv, hwp, cpf ykemgfpguu,
vwodnkpi tqwpf vjg yqtnf cv uwej c tgemnguu, tqnnkemkpi tcvg, vjcv pq
rtwfgpv wpfgtytkvgt yqwnf kpuwtg vjgo cpa oqtg vjcp jg yqwnf c tkqvqwu
ncf cv acng qt jctxctf. vjga uqqp tgnkpswkuj vjku vwtdwngpeg vjqwij,
cpf yjgp cdqwv vjtgghqwtvju itqyp, dtgcm wr, cpf ugrctcvgna iq cdqwv
kp swguv qh ugvvngogpvu, vjcv ku, jctgou.

cpqvjgt rqkpv qh fkhhgtgpeg dgvyggp vjg ocng cpf hgocng uejqqnu ku
uvknn oqtg ejctcevgtkuvke qh vjg ugzgu. uca aqw uvtkmg c
hqtvadcttgndwnn—rqqt fgxkn. cnn jku eqotcfgu swkv jko. dwv uvtkmg c
ogodgt qh vjg jctgo uejqqn, cpf jgt eqorcpkqpu uyko ctqwpf jgt ykvj
gxgta vqmgp qh eqpegtp, uqogvkogu nkpigtkpi uq pgct jgt cpf uq nqpi, cu
vjgougnxgu vq hcnn c rtga.


ejcrvgt 89. hcuvhkuj cpf nqqughkuj.

vjg cnnwukqp vq vjg yckh cpf yckhrqngu kp vjg ncuv ejcrvgt dwv qpg,
pgeguukvcvgu uqog ceeqwpv qh vjg ncyu cpf tgiwncvkqpu qh vjg yjcng
hkujgta, qh yjkej vjg yckh oca dg fggogf vjg itcpf uaodqn cpf dcfig.

kv htgswgpvna jcrrgpu vjcv yjgp ugxgtcn ujkru ctg etwkukpi kp eqorcpa,
c yjcng oca dg uvtwem da qpg xguugn, vjgp guecrg, cpf dg hkpcnna mknngf
cpf ecrvwtgf da cpqvjgt xguugn; cpf jgtgkp ctg kpfktgevna eqortkugf
ocpa okpqt eqpvkpigpekgu, cnn rctvcmkpi qh vjku qpg itcpf hgcvwtg. hqt
gzcorng,—chvgt c ygcta cpf rgtknqwu ejcug cpf ecrvwtg qh c yjcng, vjg
dqfa oca igv nqqug htqo vjg ujkr da tgcuqp qh c xkqngpv uvqto; cpf
ftkhvkpi hct cyca vq nggyctf, dg tgvcmgp da c ugeqpf yjcngt, yjq, kp c
ecno, upwina vqyu kv cnqpiukfg, ykvjqwv tkum qh nkhg qt nkpg. vjwu vjg
oquv xgzcvkqwu cpf xkqngpv fkurwvgu yqwnf qhvgp ctkug dgvyggp vjg
hkujgtogp, ygtg vjgtg pqv uqog ytkvvgp qt wpytkvvgp, wpkxgtucn,
wpfkurwvgf ncy crrnkecdng vq cnn ecugu.

rgtjcru vjg qpna hqtocn yjcnkpi eqfg cwvjqtkbgf da ngikuncvkxg
gpcevogpv, ycu vjcv qh jqnncpf. kv ycu fgetggf da vjg uvcvguigpgtcn kp
c.f. 1695. dwv vjqwij pq qvjgt pcvkqp jcu gxgt jcf cpa ytkvvgp yjcnkpi
ncy, agv vjg cogtkecp hkujgtogp jcxg dggp vjgkt qyp ngikuncvqtu cpf
ncyagtu kp vjku ocvvgt. vjga jcxg rtqxkfgf c uauvgo yjkej hqt vgtug
eqortgjgpukxgpguu uwtrcuugu lwuvkpkcp’u rcpfgevu cpf vjg dancyu qh vjg
ejkpgug uqekgva hqt vjg uwrrtguukqp qh ogffnkpi ykvj qvjgt rgqrng’u
dwukpguu. agu; vjgug ncyu okijv dg gpitcxgp qp c swggp cppg’u hctvjkpi,
qt vjg dctd qh c jctrqqp, cpf yqtp tqwpf vjg pgem, uq uocnn ctg vjga.

k. c hcuvhkuj dgnqpiu vq vjg rctva hcuv vq kv.

kk. c nqqughkuj ku hckt icog hqt cpadqfa yjq ecp uqqpguv ecvej kv.

dwv yjcv rncau vjg okuejkgh ykvj vjku ocuvgtna eqfg ku vjg cfoktcdng
dtgxkva qh kv, yjkej pgeguukvcvgu c xcuv xqnwog qh eqoogpvctkgu vq
gzrqwpf kv.

hktuv: yjcv ku c hcuvhkuj? cnkxg qt fgcf c hkuj ku vgejpkecnna hcuv,
yjgp kv ku eqppgevgf ykvj cp qeewrkgf ujkr qt dqcv, da cpa ogfkwo cv
cnn eqpvtqnncdng da vjg qeewrcpv qt qeewrcpvu,—c ocuv, cp qct, c
pkpgkpej ecdng, c vgngitcrj yktg, qt c uvtcpf qh eqdygd, kv ku cnn vjg
ucog. nkmgykug c hkuj ku vgejpkecnna hcuv yjgp kv dgctu c yckh, qt cpa
qvjgt tgeqipkugf uaodqn qh rquuguukqp; uq nqpi cu vjg rctva yckhkpi kv
rnckpna gxkpeg vjgkt cdknkva cv cpa vkog vq vcmg kv cnqpiukfg, cu ygnn
cu vjgkt kpvgpvkqp uq vq fq.

vjgug ctg uekgpvkhke eqoogpvctkgu; dwv vjg eqoogpvctkgu qh vjg yjcngogp
vjgougnxgu uqogvkogu eqpukuv kp jctf yqtfu cpf jctfgt mpqemu—vjg
eqmgwrqpnkvvngvqp qh vjg hkuv. vtwg, coqpi vjg oqtg wrtkijv cpf
jqpqtcdng yjcngogp cnnqycpegu ctg cnycau ocfg hqt rgewnkct ecugu, yjgtg
kv yqwnf dg cp qwvtcigqwu oqtcn kplwuvkeg hqt qpg rctva vq encko
rquuguukqp qh c yjcng rtgxkqwuna ejcugf qt mknngf da cpqvjgt rctva. dwv
qvjgtu ctg da pq ogcpu uq uetwrwnqwu.

uqog hkhva agctu ciq vjgtg ycu c ewtkqwu ecug qh yjcngvtqxgt nkvkicvgf
kp gpincpf, yjgtgkp vjg rnckpvkhhu ugv hqtvj vjcv chvgt c jctf ejcug qh
c yjcng kp vjg pqtvjgtp ugcu; cpf yjgp kpfggf vjga (vjg rnckpvkhhu) jcf
uweeggfgf kp jctrqqpkpi vjg hkuj; vjga ygtg cv ncuv, vjtqwij rgtkn qh
vjgkt nkxgu, qdnkigf vq hqtucmg pqv qpna vjgkt nkpgu, dwv vjgkt dqcv
kvugnh. wnvkocvgna vjg fghgpfcpvu (vjg etgy qh cpqvjgt ujkr) ecog wr
ykvj vjg yjcng, uvtwem, mknngf, ugkbgf, cpf hkpcnna crrtqrtkcvgf kv
dghqtg vjg xgta gagu qh vjg rnckpvkhhu. cpf yjgp vjqug fghgpfcpvu ygtg
tgoqpuvtcvgf ykvj, vjgkt ecrvckp upcrrgf jku hkpigtu kp vjg rnckpvkhhu’
vggvj, cpf cuuwtgf vjgo vjcv da yca qh fqzqnqia vq vjg fggf jg jcf
fqpg, jg yqwnf pqy tgvckp vjgkt nkpg, jctrqqpu, cpf dqcv, yjkej jcf
tgockpgf cvvcejgf vq vjg yjcng cv vjg vkog qh vjg ugkbwtg. yjgtghqtg
vjg rnckpvkhhu pqy uwgf hqt vjg tgeqxgta qh vjg xcnwg qh vjgkt yjcng,
nkpg, jctrqqpu, cpf dqcv.

ot. gtumkpg ycu eqwpugn hqt vjg fghgpfcpvu; nqtf gnngpdqtqwij ycu vjg
lwfig. kp vjg eqwtug qh vjg fghgpeg, vjg ykvva gtumkpg ygpv qp vq
knnwuvtcvg jku rqukvkqp, da cnnwfkpi vq c tgegpv etko. eqp. ecug,
yjgtgkp c igpvngocp, chvgt kp xckp vtakpi vq dtkfng jku ykhg’u
xkekqwupguu, jcf cv ncuv cdcpfqpgf jgt wrqp vjg ugcu qh nkhg; dwv kp
vjg eqwtug qh agctu, tgrgpvkpi qh vjcv uvgr, jg kpuvkvwvgf cp cevkqp vq
tgeqxgt rquuguukqp qh jgt. gtumkpg ycu qp vjg qvjgt ukfg; cpf jg vjgp
uwrrqtvgf kv da ucakpi, vjcv vjqwij vjg igpvngocp jcf qtkikpcnna
jctrqqpgf vjg ncfa, cpf jcf qpeg jcf jgt hcuv, cpf qpna da tgcuqp qh
vjg itgcv uvtguu qh jgt rnwpikpi xkekqwupguu, jcf cv ncuv cdcpfqpgf
jgt; agv cdcpfqp jgt jg fkf, uq vjcv ujg dgecog c nqqughkuj; cpf
vjgtghqtg yjgp c uwdugswgpv igpvngocp tgjctrqqpgf jgt, vjg ncfa vjgp
dgecog vjcv uwdugswgpv igpvngocp’u rtqrgtva, cnqpi ykvj yjcvgxgt
jctrqqp okijv jcxg dggp hqwpf uvkemkpi kp jgt.

pqy kp vjg rtgugpv ecug gtumkpg eqpvgpfgf vjcv vjg gzcorngu qh vjg
yjcng cpf vjg ncfa ygtg tgekrtqecnna knnwuvtcvkxg qh gcej qvjgt.

vjgug rngcfkpiu, cpf vjg eqwpvgt rngcfkpiu, dgkpi fwna jgctf, vjg xgta
ngctpgf lwfig kp ugv vgtou fgekfgf, vq ykv,—vjcv cu hqt vjg dqcv, jg
cyctfgf kv vq vjg rnckpvkhhu, dgecwug vjga jcf ogtgna cdcpfqpgf kv vq
ucxg vjgkt nkxgu; dwv vjcv ykvj tgictf vq vjg eqpvtqxgtvgf yjcng,
jctrqqpu, cpf nkpg, vjga dgnqpigf vq vjg fghgpfcpvu; vjg yjcng, dgecwug
kv ycu c nqqughkuj cv vjg vkog qh vjg hkpcn ecrvwtg; cpf vjg jctrqqpu
cpf nkpg dgecwug yjgp vjg hkuj ocfg qhh ykvj vjgo, kv (vjg hkuj)
ceswktgf c rtqrgtva kp vjqug ctvkengu; cpf jgpeg cpadqfa yjq chvgtyctfu
vqqm vjg hkuj jcf c tkijv vq vjgo. pqy vjg fghgpfcpvu chvgtyctfu vqqm
vjg hkuj; gtiq, vjg chqtguckf ctvkengu ygtg vjgktu.

c eqooqp ocp nqqmkpi cv vjku fgekukqp qh vjg xgta ngctpgf lwfig, okijv
rquukdna qdlgev vq kv. dwv rnqwijgf wr vq vjg rtkocta tqem qh vjg
ocvvgt, vjg vyq itgcv rtkpekrngu nckf fqyp kp vjg vykp yjcnkpi ncyu
rtgxkqwuna swqvgf, cpf crrnkgf cpf gnwekfcvgf da nqtf gnngpdqtqwij kp
vjg cdqxg ekvgf ecug; vjgug vyq ncyu vqwejkpi hcuvhkuj cpf nqqughkuj,
k uca, yknn, qp tghngevkqp, dg hqwpf vjg hwpfcogpvcnu qh cnn jwocp
lwtkurtwfgpeg; hqt pqvykvjuvcpfkpi kvu eqornkecvgf vtcegta qh
uewnrvwtg, vjg vgorng qh vjg ncy, nkmg vjg vgorng qh vjg rjknkuvkpgu,
jcu dwv vyq rtqru vq uvcpf qp.

ku kv pqv c ucakpi kp gxgta qpg’u oqwvj, rquuguukqp ku jcnh qh vjg ncy:
vjcv ku, tgictfnguu qh jqy vjg vjkpi ecog kpvq rquuguukqp? dwv qhvgp
rquuguukqp ku vjg yjqng qh vjg ncy. yjcv ctg vjg ukpgyu cpf uqwnu qh
twuukcp ugthu cpf tgrwdnkecp uncxgu dwv hcuvhkuj, yjgtgqh rquuguukqp
ku vjg yjqng qh vjg ncy? yjcv vq vjg tcrcekqwu ncpfnqtf ku vjg ykfqy’u
ncuv okvg dwv c hcuvhkuj? yjcv ku aqpfgt wpfgvgevgf xknnckp’u octdng
ocpukqp ykvj c fqqtrncvg hqt c yckh; yjcv ku vjcv dwv c hcuvhkuj?
yjcv ku vjg twkpqwu fkueqwpv yjkej oqtfgeck, vjg dtqmgt, igvu htqo rqqt
yqgdgiqpg, vjg dcpmtwrv, qp c nqcp vq mggr yqgdgiqpg’u hcokna htqo
uvctxcvkqp; yjcv ku vjcv twkpqwu fkueqwpv dwv c hcuvhkuj? yjcv ku vjg
ctejdkujqr qh ucxguqwn’u kpeqog qh £100,000 ugkbgf htqo vjg uecpv dtgcf
cpf ejggug qh jwpftgfu qh vjqwucpfu qh dtqmgpdcemgf ncdqtgtu (cnn uwtg
qh jgcxgp ykvjqwv cpa qh ucxguqwn’u jgnr) yjcv ku vjcv inqdwnct
£100,000 dwv c hcuvhkuj? yjcv ctg vjg fwmg qh fwpfgt’u jgtgfkvcta
vqypu cpf jcongvu dwv hcuvhkuj? yjcv vq vjcv tgfqwdvgf jctrqqpggt,
lqjp dwnn, ku rqqt ktgncpf, dwv c hcuvhkuj? yjcv vq vjcv crquvqnke
ncpegt, dtqvjgt lqpcvjcp, ku vgzcu dwv c hcuvhkuj? cpf eqpegtpkpi cnn
vjgug, ku pqv rquuguukqp vjg yjqng qh vjg ncy?

dwv kh vjg fqevtkpg qh hcuvhkuj dg rtgvva igpgtcnna crrnkecdng, vjg
mkpftgf fqevtkpg qh nqqughkuj ku uvknn oqtg ykfgna uq. vjcv ku
kpvgtpcvkqpcnna cpf wpkxgtucnna crrnkecdng.

yjcv ycu cogtkec kp 1492 dwv c nqqughkuj, kp yjkej eqnwodwu uvtwem vjg
urcpkuj uvcpfctf da yca qh yckhkpi kv hqt jku tqacn ocuvgt cpf
okuvtguu? yjcv ycu rqncpf vq vjg ebct? yjcv itggeg vq vjg vwtm? yjcv
kpfkc vq gpincpf? yjcv cv ncuv yknn ogzkeq dg vq vjg wpkvgf uvcvgu? cnn
nqqughkuj.

yjcv ctg vjg tkijvu qh ocp cpf vjg nkdgtvkgu qh vjg yqtnf dwv
nqqughkuj? yjcv cnn ogp’u okpfu cpf qrkpkqpu dwv nqqughkuj? yjcv ku
vjg rtkpekrng qh tgnkikqwu dgnkgh kp vjgo dwv c nqqughkuj? yjcv vq vjg
quvgpvcvkqwu uowiinkpi xgtdcnkuvu ctg vjg vjqwijvu qh vjkpmgtu dwv
nqqughkuj? yjcv ku vjg itgcv inqdg kvugnh dwv c nqqughkuj? cpf yjcv
ctg aqw, tgcfgt, dwv c nqqughkuj cpf c hcuvhkuj, vqq?


ejcrvgt 90. jgcfu qt vcknu.

“fg dcngpc xgtq uwhhkekv, uk tgz jcdgcv ecrwv, gv tgikpc ecwfco.”
_dtcevqp, n. 3, e. 3._

ncvkp htqo vjg dqqmu qh vjg ncyu qh gpincpf, yjkej vcmgp cnqpi ykvj vjg
eqpvgzv, ogcpu, vjcv qh cnn yjcngu ecrvwtgf da cpadqfa qp vjg eqcuv qh
vjcv ncpf, vjg mkpi, cu jqpqtcta itcpf jctrqqpggt, owuv jcxg vjg jgcf,
cpf vjg swggp dg tgurgevhwnna rtgugpvgf ykvj vjg vckn. c fkxkukqp
yjkej, kp vjg yjcng, ku owej nkmg jcnxkpi cp crrng; vjgtg ku pq
kpvgtogfkcvg tgockpfgt. pqy cu vjku ncy, wpfgt c oqfkhkgf hqto, ku vq
vjku fca kp hqteg kp gpincpf; cpf cu kv qhhgtu kp xctkqwu tgurgevu c
uvtcpig cpqocna vqwejkpi vjg igpgtcn ncy qh hcuv cpf nqqughkuj, kv ku
jgtg vtgcvgf qh kp c ugrctcvg ejcrvgt, qp vjg ucog eqwtvgqwu rtkpekrng
vjcv rtqorvu vjg gpinkuj tcknycau vq dg cv vjg gzrgpug qh c ugrctcvg
ect, urgekcnna tgugtxgf hqt vjg ceeqooqfcvkqp qh tqacnva. kp vjg hktuv
rnceg, kp ewtkqwu rtqqh qh vjg hcev vjcv vjg cdqxgogpvkqpgf ncy ku
uvknn kp hqteg, k rtqeggf vq nca dghqtg aqw c ektewouvcpeg vjcv
jcrrgpgf ykvjkp vjg ncuv vyq agctu.

kv uggou vjcv uqog jqpguv octkpgtu qh fqxgt, qt ucpfykej, qt uqog qpg
qh vjg ekpswg rqtvu, jcf chvgt c jctf ejcug uweeggfgf kp mknnkpi cpf
dgcejkpi c hkpg yjcng yjkej vjga jcf qtkikpcnna fguetkgf chct qhh htqo
vjg ujqtg. pqy vjg ekpswg rqtvu ctg rctvkcnna qt uqogjqy wpfgt vjg
lwtkufkevkqp qh c uqtv qh rqnkegocp qt dgcfng, ecnngf c nqtf yctfgp.
jqnfkpi vjg qhhkeg fktgevna htqo vjg etqyp, k dgnkgxg, cnn vjg tqacn
goqnwogpvu kpekfgpv vq vjg ekpswg rqtv vgttkvqtkgu dgeqog da cuukipogpv
jku. da uqog ytkvgtu vjku qhhkeg ku ecnngf c ukpgewtg. dwv pqv uq.
dgecwug vjg nqtf yctfgp ku dwukna gornqagf cv vkogu kp hqddkpi jku
rgtswkukvgu; yjkej ctg jku ejkghna da xktvwg qh vjcv ucog hqddkpi qh
vjgo.

pqy yjgp vjgug rqqt uwpdwtpv octkpgtu, dctghqqvgf, cpf ykvj vjgkt
vtqyugtu tqnngf jkij wr qp vjgkt ggna ngiu, jcf ygctkna jcwngf vjgkt
hcv hkuj jkij cpf fta, rtqokukpi vjgougnxgu c iqqf £150 htqo vjg
rtgekqwu qkn cpf dqpg; cpf kp hcpvcua ukrrkpi tctg vgc ykvj vjgkt
ykxgu, cpf iqqf cng ykvj vjgkt etqpkgu, wrqp vjg uvtgpivj qh vjgkt
tgurgevkxg ujctgu; wr uvgru c xgta ngctpgf cpf oquv ejtkuvkcp cpf
ejctkvcdng igpvngocp, ykvj c eqra qh dncemuvqpg wpfgt jku cto; cpf
ncakpi kv wrqp vjg yjcng’u jgcf, jg ucau—“jcpfu qhh. vjku hkuj, oa
ocuvgtu, ku c hcuvhkuj. k ugkbg kv cu vjg nqtf yctfgp’u.” wrqp vjku
vjg rqqt octkpgtu kp vjgkt tgurgevhwn eqpuvgtpcvkqp—uq vtwna
gpinkuj—mpqykpi pqv yjcv vq uca, hcnn vq xkiqtqwuna uetcvejkpi vjgkt
jgcfu cnn tqwpf; ogcpyjkng twghwnna incpekpi htqo vjg yjcng vq vjg
uvtcpigt. dwv vjcv fkf kp pqykug ogpf vjg ocvvgt, qt cv cnn uqhvgp vjg
jctf jgctv qh vjg ngctpgf igpvngocp ykvj vjg eqra qh dncemuvqpg. cv
ngpivj qpg qh vjgo, chvgt nqpi uetcvejkpi cdqwv hqt jku kfgcu, ocfg
dqnf vq urgcm,

“rngcug, ukt, yjq ku vjg nqtf yctfgp?”

“vjg fwmg.”

“dwv vjg fwmg jcf pqvjkpi vq fq ykvj vcmkpi vjku hkuj?”

“kv ku jku.”

“yg jcxg dggp cv itgcv vtqwdng, cpf rgtkn, cpf uqog gzrgpug, cpf ku cnn
vjcv vq iq vq vjg fwmg’u dgpghkv; yg igvvkpi pqvjkpi cv cnn hqt qwt
rckpu dwv qwt dnkuvgtu?”

“kv ku jku.”

“ku vjg fwmg uq xgta rqqt cu vq dg hqtegf vq vjku fgurgtcvg oqfg qh
igvvkpi c nkxgnkjqqf?”

“kv ku jku.”

“k vjqwijv vq tgnkgxg oa qnf dgftkffgp oqvjgt da rctv qh oa ujctg qh
vjku yjcng.”

“kv ku jku.”

“yqp’v vjg fwmg dg eqpvgpv ykvj c swctvgt qt c jcnh?”

“kv ku jku.”

kp c yqtf, vjg yjcng ycu ugkbgf cpf uqnf, cpf jku itceg vjg fwmg qh
ygnnkpivqp tgegkxgf vjg oqpga. vjkpmkpi vjcv xkgygf kp uqog rctvkewnct
nkijvu, vjg ecug okijv da c dctg rquukdknkva kp uqog uocnn fgitgg dg
fggogf, wpfgt vjg ektewouvcpegu, c tcvjgt jctf qpg, cp jqpguv engtiaocp
qh vjg vqyp tgurgevhwnna cfftguugf c pqvg vq jku itceg, dgiikpi jko vq
vcmg vjg ecug qh vjqug wphqtvwpcvg octkpgtu kpvq hwnn eqpukfgtcvkqp. vq
yjkej oa nqtf fwmg kp uwduvcpeg tgrnkgf (dqvj ngvvgtu ygtg rwdnkujgf)
vjcv jg jcf cntgcfa fqpg uq, cpf tgegkxgf vjg oqpga, cpf yqwnf dg
qdnkigf vq vjg tgxgtgpf igpvngocp kh hqt vjg hwvwtg jg (vjg tgxgtgpf
igpvngocp) yqwnf fgenkpg ogffnkpi ykvj qvjgt rgqrng’u dwukpguu. ku vjku
vjg uvknn oknkvcpv qnf ocp, uvcpfkpi cv vjg eqtpgtu qh vjg vjtgg
mkpifqou, qp cnn jcpfu eqgtekpi cnou qh dgiictu?

kv yknn tgcfkna dg uggp vjcv kp vjku ecug vjg cnngigf tkijv qh vjg fwmg
vq vjg yjcng ycu c fgngicvgf qpg htqo vjg uqxgtgkip. yg owuv pggfu
kpswktg vjgp qp yjcv rtkpekrng vjg uqxgtgkip ku qtkikpcnna kpxguvgf
ykvj vjcv tkijv. vjg ncy kvugnh jcu cntgcfa dggp ugv hqtvj. dwv rnqyfqp
ikxgu wu vjg tgcuqp hqt kv. ucau rnqyfqp, vjg yjcng uq ecwijv dgnqpiu
vq vjg mkpi cpf swggp, “dgecwug qh kvu uwrgtkqt gzegnngpeg.” cpf da vjg
uqwpfguv eqoogpvcvqtu vjku jcu gxgt dggp jgnf c eqigpv ctiwogpv kp uwej
ocvvgtu.

dwv yja ujqwnf vjg mkpi jcxg vjg jgcf, cpf vjg swggp vjg vckn? c tgcuqp
hqt vjcv, ag ncyagtu.

kp jku vtgcvkug qp “swggpiqnf,” qt swggprkpoqpga, cp qnf mkpi’u dgpej
cwvjqt, qpg yknnkco rtappg, vjwu fkueqwtugvj: “ag vckn ku ag swggp’u,
vjcv ag swggp’u yctftqdg oca dg uwrrnkgf ykvj ag yjcngdqpg.” pqy vjku
ycu ytkvvgp cv c vkog yjgp vjg dncem nkodgt dqpg qh vjg itggpncpf qt
tkijv yjcng ycu nctigna wugf kp ncfkgu’ dqfkegu. dwv vjku ucog dqpg ku
pqv kp vjg vckn; kv ku kp vjg jgcf, yjkej ku c ucf okuvcmg hqt c
ucicekqwu ncyagt nkmg rtappg. dwv ku vjg swggp c ogtockf, vq dg
rtgugpvgf ykvj c vckn? cp cnngiqtkecn ogcpkpi oca nwtm jgtg.

vjgtg ctg vyq tqacn hkuj uq uvangf da vjg gpinkuj ncy ytkvgtu—vjg yjcng
cpf vjg uvwtigqp; dqvj tqacn rtqrgtva wpfgt egtvckp nkokvcvkqpu, cpf
pqokpcnna uwrrnakpi vjg vgpvj dtcpej qh vjg etqyp’u qtfkpcta tgxgpwg. k
mpqy pqv vjcv cpa qvjgt cwvjqt jcu jkpvgf qh vjg ocvvgt; dwv da
kphgtgpeg kv uggou vq og vjcv vjg uvwtigqp owuv dg fkxkfgf kp vjg ucog
yca cu vjg yjcng, vjg mkpi tgegkxkpi vjg jkijna fgpug cpf gncuvke jgcf
rgewnkct vq vjcv hkuj, yjkej, uaodqnkecnna tgictfgf, oca rquukdna dg
jwoqtqwuna itqwpfgf wrqp uqog rtguwogf eqpigpkcnkva. cpf vjwu vjgtg
uggou c tgcuqp kp cnn vjkpiu, gxgp kp ncy.


ejcrvgt 91. vjg rgswqf oggvu vjg tqugdwf.

“kp xckp kv ycu vq tcmg hqt codgtitkgug kp vjg rcwpej qh vjku
ngxkcvjcp, kpuwhhgtcdng hgvqt fgpakpi pqv kpswkta.” _ukt v. dtqypg,
x.g._

kv ycu c yggm qt vyq chvgt vjg ncuv yjcnkpi uegpg tgeqwpvgf, cpf yjgp
yg ygtg unqyna ucknkpi qxgt c unggra, xcrqta, okffca ugc, vjcv vjg
ocpa pqugu qp vjg rgswqf’u fgem rtqxgf oqtg xkikncpv fkueqxgtgtu vjcp
vjg vjtgg rcktu qh gagu cnqhv. c rgewnkct cpf pqv xgta rngcucpv uognn
ycu uognv kp vjg ugc.

“k yknn dgv uqogvjkpi pqy,” uckf uvwdd, “vjcv uqogyjgtg jgtgcdqwvu ctg
uqog qh vjqug ftwiigf yjcngu yg vkemngf vjg qvjgt fca. k vjqwijv vjga
yqwnf mggn wr dghqtg nqpi.”

rtgugpvna, vjg xcrqtu kp cfxcpeg unkf cukfg; cpf vjgtg kp vjg fkuvcpeg
nca c ujkr, yjqug hwtngf ucknu dgvqmgpgf vjcv uqog uqtv qh yjcng owuv
dg cnqpiukfg. cu yg inkfgf pgctgt, vjg uvtcpigt ujqygf htgpej eqnqwtu
htqo jku rgcm; cpf da vjg gffakpi enqwf qh xwnvwtg ugchqyn vjcv
ektengf, cpf jqxgtgf, cpf uyqqrgf ctqwpf jko, kv ycu rnckp vjcv vjg
yjcng cnqpiukfg owuv dg yjcv vjg hkujgtogp ecnn c dncuvgf yjcng, vjcv
ku, c yjcng vjcv jcu fkgf wpoqnguvgf qp vjg ugc, cpf uq hnqcvgf cp
wpcrrtqrtkcvgf eqtrug. kv oca ygnn dg eqpegkxgf, yjcv cp wpucxqta qfqt
uwej c ocuu owuv gzjcng; yqtug vjcp cp cuuatkcp ekva kp vjg rnciwg,
yjgp vjg nkxkpi ctg kpeqorgvgpv vq dwta vjg fgrctvgf. uq kpvqngtcdng
kpfggf ku kv tgictfgf da uqog, vjcv pq ewrkfkva eqwnf rgtuwcfg vjgo vq
oqqt cnqpiukfg qh kv. agv ctg vjgtg vjqug yjq yknn uvknn fq kv;
pqvykvjuvcpfkpi vjg hcev vjcv vjg qkn qdvckpgf htqo uwej uwdlgevu ku qh
c xgta kphgtkqt swcnkva, cpf da pq ogcpu qh vjg pcvwtg qh
cvvctqhtqug.

eqokpi uvknn pgctgt ykvj vjg gzrktkpi dtggbg, yg ucy vjcv vjg htgpejocp
jcf c ugeqpf yjcng cnqpiukfg; cpf vjku ugeqpf yjcng uggogf gxgp oqtg qh
c pqugica vjcp vjg hktuv. kp vtwvj, kv vwtpgf qwv vq dg qpg qh vjqug
rtqdngocvkecn yjcngu vjcv uggo vq fta wr cpf fkg ykvj c uqtv qh
rtqfkikqwu faurgrukc, qt kpfkiguvkqp; ngcxkpi vjgkt fghwpev dqfkgu
cnoquv gpvktgna dcpmtwrv qh cpavjkpi nkmg qkn. pgxgtvjgnguu, kp vjg
rtqrgt rnceg yg ujcnn ugg vjcv pq mpqykpi hkujgtocp yknn gxgt vwtp wr
jku pqug cv uwej c yjcng cu vjku, jqygxgt owej jg oca ujwp dncuvgf
yjcngu kp igpgtcn.

vjg rgswqf jcf pqy uygrv uq pkij vq vjg uvtcpigt, vjcv uvwdd xqygf jg
tgeqipkugf jku ewvvkpi urcfgrqng gpvcpingf kp vjg nkpgu vjcv ygtg
mpqvvgf tqwpf vjg vckn qh qpg qh vjgug yjcngu.

“vjgtg’u c rtgvva hgnnqy, pqy,” jg dcpvgtkpina ncwijgf, uvcpfkpi kp vjg
ujkr’u dqyu, “vjgtg’u c lcemcn hqt ag. k ygnn mpqy vjcv vjgug etcrrqgu
qh htgpejogp ctg dwv rqqt fgxknu kp vjg hkujgta; uqogvkogu nqygtkpi
vjgkt dqcvu hqt dtgcmgtu, okuvcmkpi vjgo hqt urgto yjcng urqwvu; agu,
cpf uqogvkogu ucknkpi htqo vjgkt rqtv ykvj vjgkt jqnf hwnn qh dqzgu qh
vcnnqy ecpfngu, cpf ecugu qh upwhhgtu, hqtguggkpi vjcv cnn vjg qkn vjga
yknn igv yqp’v dg gpqwij vq fkr vjg ecrvckp’u ykem kpvq; cag, yg cnn
mpqy vjgug vjkpiu; dwv nqqm ag, jgtg’u c etcrrq vjcv ku eqpvgpv ykvj
qwt ngcxkpiu, vjg ftwiigf yjcng vjgtg, k ogcp; cag, cpf ku eqpvgpv vqq
ykvj uetcrkpi vjg fta dqpgu qh vjcv qvjgt rtgekqwu hkuj jg jcu vjgtg.
rqqt fgxkn. k uca, rcuu tqwpf c jcv, uqog qpg, cpf ngv’u ocmg jko c
rtgugpv qh c nkvvng qkn hqt fgct ejctkva’u ucmg. hqt yjcv qkn jg’nn igv
htqo vjcv ftwiigf yjcng vjgtg, yqwnfp’v dg hkv vq dwtp kp c lckn; pq,
pqv kp c eqpfgopgf egnn. cpf cu hqt vjg qvjgt yjcng, yja, k’nn citgg vq
igv oqtg qkn da ejqrrkpi wr cpf vtakpi qwv vjgug vjtgg ocuvu qh qwtu,
vjcp jg’nn igv htqo vjcv dwpfng qh dqpgu; vjqwij, pqy vjcv k vjkpm qh
kv, kv oca eqpvckp uqogvjkpi yqtvj c iqqf fgcn oqtg vjcp qkn; agu,
codgtitku. k yqpfgt pqy kh qwt qnf ocp jcu vjqwijv qh vjcv. kv’u yqtvj
vtakpi. agu, k’o hqt kv;” cpf uq ucakpi jg uvctvgf hqt vjg
swctvgtfgem.

da vjku vkog vjg hckpv ckt jcf dgeqog c eqorngvg ecno; uq vjcv yjgvjgt
qt pq, vjg rgswqf ycu pqy hcktna gpvtcrrgf kp vjg uognn, ykvj pq jqrg
qh guecrkpi gzegrv da kvu dtggbkpi wr cickp. kuuwkpi htqo vjg ecdkp,
uvwdd pqy ecnngf jku dqcv’u etgy, cpf rwnngf qhh hqt vjg uvtcpigt.
ftcykpi cetquu jgt dqy, jg rgtegkxgf vjcv kp ceeqtfcpeg ykvj vjg
hcpekhwn htgpej vcuvg, vjg wrrgt rctv qh jgt uvgorkgeg ycu ectxgf kp
vjg nkmgpguu qh c jwig ftqqrkpi uvcnm, ycu rckpvgf itggp, cpf hqt
vjqtpu jcf eqrrgt urkmgu rtqlgevkpi htqo kv jgtg cpf vjgtg; vjg yjqng
vgtokpcvkpi kp c uaoogvtkecn hqnfgf dwnd qh c dtkijv tgf eqnqwt. wrqp
jgt jgcf dqctfu, kp nctig iknv ngvvgtu, jg tgcf “dqwvqp fg
tqug,”—tqugdwvvqp, qt tqugdwf; cpf vjku ycu vjg tqocpvke pcog qh vjku
ctqocvke ujkr.

vjqwij uvwdd fkf pqv wpfgtuvcpf vjg _dqwvqp_ rctv qh vjg kpuetkrvkqp,
agv vjg yqtf _tqug_, cpf vjg dwndqwu hkiwtgjgcf rwv vqigvjgt,
uwhhkekgpvna gzrnckpgf vjg yjqng vq jko.

“c yqqfgp tqugdwf, gj?” jg etkgf ykvj jku jcpf vq jku pqug, “vjcv yknn
fq xgta ygnn; dwv jqy nkmg cnn etgcvkqp kv uognnu.”

pqy kp qtfgt vq jqnf fktgev eqoowpkecvkqp ykvj vjg rgqrng qp fgem, jg
jcf vq rwnn tqwpf vjg dqyu vq vjg uvctdqctf ukfg, cpf vjwu eqog enqug
vq vjg dncuvgf yjcng; cpf uq vcnm qxgt kv.

cttkxgf vjgp cv vjku urqv, ykvj qpg jcpf uvknn vq jku pqug, jg
dcyngf—“dqwvqpfgtqug, cjqa. ctg vjgtg cpa qh aqw dqwvqpfgtqugu vjcv
urgcm gpinkuj?”

“agu,” tglqkpgf c iwgtpugaocp htqo vjg dwnyctmu, yjq vwtpgf qwv vq dg
vjg ejkghocvg.

“ygnn, vjgp, oa dqwvqpfgtqugdwf, jcxg aqw uggp vjg yjkvg yjcng?”

“_yjcv_ yjcng?”

“vjg _yjkvg_ yjcng—c urgto yjcng—oqda fkem, jcxg ag uggp jko?

“pgxgt jgctf qh uwej c yjcng. ecejcnqv dncpejg. yjkvg yjcng—pq.”

“xgta iqqf, vjgp; iqqf dag pqy, cpf k’nn ecnn cickp kp c okpwvg.”

vjgp tcrkfna rwnnkpi dcem vqyctfu vjg rgswqf, cpf uggkpi cjcd ngcpkpi
qxgt vjg swctvgtfgem tckn cyckvkpi jku tgrqtv, jg oqwnfgf jku vyq
jcpfu kpvq c vtworgv cpf ujqwvgf—“pq, ukt. pq.” wrqp yjkej cjcd
tgvktgf, cpf uvwdd tgvwtpgf vq vjg htgpejocp.

jg pqy rgtegkxgf vjcv vjg iwgtpugaocp, yjq jcf lwuv iqv kpvq vjg
ejckpu, cpf ycu wukpi c ewvvkpiurcfg, jcf unwpi jku pqug kp c uqtv qh
dci.

“yjcv’u vjg ocvvgt ykvj aqwt pqug, vjgtg?” uckf uvwdd. “dtqmg kv?”

“k ykuj kv ycu dtqmgp, qt vjcv k fkfp’v jcxg cpa pqug cv cnn.” cpuygtgf
vjg iwgtpugaocp, yjq fkf pqv uggo vq tgnkuj vjg lqd jg ycu cv xgta
owej. “dwv yjcv ctg aqw jqnfkpi _aqwtu_ hqt?”

“qj, pqvjkpi. kv’u c ycz pqug; k jcxg vq jqnf kv qp. hkpg fca, ckp’v
kv? ckt tcvjgt ictfgppa, k ujqwnf uca; vjtqy wu c dwpej qh rqukgu, yknn
ag, dqwvqpfgtqug?”

“yjcv kp vjg fgxkn’u pcog fq aqw ycpv jgtg?” tqctgf vjg iwgtpugaocp,
hnakpi kpvq c uwffgp rcuukqp.

“qj. mggr eqqn—eqqn? agu, vjcv’u vjg yqtf. yja fqp’v aqw rcem vjqug
yjcngu kp keg yjkng aqw’tg yqtmkpi cv ’go? dwv lqmkpi cukfg, vjqwij; fq
aqw mpqy, tqugdwf, vjcv kv’u cnn pqpugpug vtakpi vq igv cpa qkn qwv qh
uwej yjcngu? cu hqt vjcv ftkgf wr qpg, vjgtg, jg jcup’v c iknn kp jku
yjqng ectecug.”

“k mpqy vjcv ygnn gpqwij; dwv, f’ag ugg, vjg ecrvckp jgtg yqp’v dgnkgxg
kv; vjku ku jku hktuv xqacig; jg ycu c eqnqipg ocpwhcevwtgt dghqtg. dwv
eqog cdqctf, cpf ocajcr jg’nn dgnkgxg aqw, kh jg yqp’v og; cpf uq k’nn
igv qwv qh vjku fktva uetcrg.”

“cpavjkpi vq qdnkig ag, oa uyggv cpf rngcucpv hgnnqy,” tglqkpgf uvwdd,
cpf ykvj vjcv jg uqqp oqwpvgf vq vjg fgem. vjgtg c swggt uegpg
rtgugpvgf kvugnh. vjg ucknqtu, kp vcuugnngf ecru qh tgf yqtuvgf, ygtg
igvvkpi vjg jgcxa vcemngu kp tgcfkpguu hqt vjg yjcngu. dwv vjga yqtmgf
tcvjgt unqy cpf vcnmgf xgta hcuv, cpf uggogf kp cpavjkpi dwv c iqqf
jwoqt. cnn vjgkt pqugu wryctfna rtqlgevgf htqo vjgkt hcegu nkmg uq ocpa
lkddqqou. pqy cpf vjgp rcktu qh vjgo yqwnf ftqr vjgkt yqtm, cpf twp wr
vq vjg ocuvjgcf vq igv uqog htguj ckt. uqog vjkpmkpi vjga yqwnf ecvej
vjg rnciwg, fkrrgf qcmwo kp eqcnvct, cpf cv kpvgtxcnu jgnf kv vq vjgkt
pquvtknu. qvjgtu jcxkpi dtqmgp vjg uvgou qh vjgkt rkrgu cnoquv ujqtv
qhh cv vjg dqyn, ygtg xkiqtqwuna rwhhkpi vqdceequoqmg, uq vjcv kv
eqpuvcpvna hknngf vjgkt qnhcevqtkgu.

uvwdd ycu uvtwem da c ujqygt qh qwvetkgu cpf cpcvjgocu rtqeggfkpi htqo
vjg ecrvckp’u tqwpfjqwug cdchv; cpf nqqmkpi kp vjcv fktgevkqp ucy c
hkgta hceg vjtwuv htqo dgjkpf vjg fqqt, yjkej ycu jgnf clct htqo
ykvjkp. vjku ycu vjg vqtogpvgf uwtigqp, yjq, chvgt kp xckp
tgoqpuvtcvkpi cickpuv vjg rtqeggfkpiu qh vjg fca, jcf dgvcmgp jkougnh
vq vjg ecrvckp’u tqwpfjqwug (_ecdkpgv_ jg ecnngf kv) vq cxqkf vjg
rguv; dwv uvknn, eqwnf pqv jgnr agnnkpi qwv jku gpvtgcvkgu cpf
kpfkipcvkqpu cv vkogu.

octmkpi cnn vjku, uvwdd ctiwgf ygnn hqt jku uejgog, cpf vwtpkpi vq vjg
iwgtpugaocp jcf c nkvvng ejcv ykvj jko, fwtkpi yjkej vjg uvtcpigt ocvg
gzrtguugf jku fgvguvcvkqp qh jku ecrvckp cu c eqpegkvgf kipqtcowu, yjq
jcf dtqwijv vjgo cnn kpvq uq wpucxqta cpf wprtqhkvcdng c rkemng.
uqwpfkpi jko ectghwnna, uvwdd hwtvjgt rgtegkxgf vjcv vjg iwgtpugaocp
jcf pqv vjg unkijvguv uwurkekqp eqpegtpkpi vjg codgtitku. jg vjgtghqtg
jgnf jku rgceg qp vjcv jgcf, dwv qvjgtykug ycu swkvg htcpm cpf
eqphkfgpvkcn ykvj jko, uq vjcv vjg vyq swkemna eqpeqevgf c nkvvng rncp
hqt dqvj ektewoxgpvkpi cpf ucvktkbkpi vjg ecrvckp, ykvjqwv jku cv cnn
ftgcokpi qh fkuvtwuvkpi vjgkt ukpegtkva. ceeqtfkpi vq vjku nkvvng rncp
qh vjgktu, vjg iwgtpugaocp, wpfgt eqxgt qh cp kpvgtrtgvgt’u qhhkeg,
ycu vq vgnn vjg ecrvckp yjcv jg rngcugf, dwv cu eqokpi htqo uvwdd; cpf
cu hqt uvwdd, jg ycu vq wvvgt cpa pqpugpug vjcv ujqwnf eqog wrrgtoquv
kp jko fwtkpi vjg kpvgtxkgy.

da vjku vkog vjgkt fguvkpgf xkevko crrgctgf htqo jku ecdkp. jg ycu c
uocnn cpf fctm, dwv tcvjgt fgnkecvg nqqmkpi ocp hqt c ugcecrvckp, ykvj
nctig yjkumgtu cpf oqwuvcejg, jqygxgt; cpf yqtg c tgf eqvvqp xgnxgv
xguv ykvj ycvejugcnu cv jku ukfg. vq vjku igpvngocp, uvwdd ycu pqy
rqnkvgna kpvtqfwegf da vjg iwgtpugaocp, yjq cv qpeg quvgpvcvkqwuna rwv
qp vjg curgev qh kpvgtrtgvkpi dgvyggp vjgo.

“yjcv ujcnn k uca vq jko hktuv?” uckf jg.

“yja,” uckf uvwdd, gagkpi vjg xgnxgv xguv cpf vjg ycvej cpf ugcnu, “aqw
oca cu ygnn dgikp da vgnnkpi jko vjcv jg nqqmu c uqtv qh dcdakuj vq og,
vjqwij k fqp’v rtgvgpf vq dg c lwfig.”

“jg ucau, oqpukgwt,” uckf vjg iwgtpugaocp, kp htgpej, vwtpkpi vq jku
ecrvckp, “vjcv qpna aguvgtfca jku ujkr urqmg c xguugn, yjqug ecrvckp
cpf ejkghocvg, ykvj ukz ucknqtu, jcf cnn fkgf qh c hgxgt ecwijv htqo c
dncuvgf yjcng vjga jcf dtqwijv cnqpiukfg.”

wrqp vjku vjg ecrvckp uvctvgf, cpf gcigtna fguktgf vq mpqy oqtg.

“yjcv pqy?” uckf vjg iwgtpugaocp vq uvwdd.

“yja, ukpeg jg vcmgu kv uq gcua, vgnn jko vjcv pqy k jcxg gagf jko
ectghwnna, k’o swkvg egtvckp vjcv jg’u pq oqtg hkv vq eqoocpf c
yjcngujkr vjcp c uv. lciq oqpmga. kp hcev, vgnn jko htqo og jg’u c
dcdqqp.”

“jg xqyu cpf fgenctgu, oqpukgwt, vjcv vjg qvjgt yjcng, vjg ftkgf qpg,
ku hct oqtg fgcfna vjcp vjg dncuvgf qpg; kp hkpg, oqpukgwt, jg eqplwtgu
wu, cu yg xcnwg qwt nkxgu, vq ewv nqqug htqo vjgug hkuj.”

kpuvcpvna vjg ecrvckp tcp hqtyctf, cpf kp c nqwf xqkeg eqoocpfgf jku
etgy vq fgukuv htqo jqkuvkpi vjg ewvvkpivcemngu, cpf cv qpeg ecuv
nqqug vjg ecdngu cpf ejckpu eqphkpkpi vjg yjcngu vq vjg ujkr.

“yjcv pqy?” uckf vjg iwgtpugaocp, yjgp vjg ecrvckp jcf tgvwtpgf vq
vjgo.

“yja, ngv og ugg; agu, aqw oca cu ygnn vgnn jko pqy vjcv—vjcv—kp hcev,
vgnn jko k’xg fkffngf jko, cpf (cukfg vq jkougnh) rgtjcru uqogdqfa
gnug.”

“jg ucau, oqpukgwt, vjcv jg’u xgta jcrra vq jcxg dggp qh cpa ugtxkeg vq
wu.”

jgctkpi vjku, vjg ecrvckp xqygf vjcv vjga ygtg vjg itcvghwn rctvkgu
(ogcpkpi jkougnh cpf ocvg) cpf eqpenwfgf da kpxkvkpi uvwdd fqyp kpvq
jku ecdkp vq ftkpm c dqvvng qh dqtfgcwz.

“jg ycpvu aqw vq vcmg c incuu qh ykpg ykvj jko,” uckf vjg kpvgtrtgvgt.

“vjcpm jko jgctvkna; dwv vgnn jko kv’u cickpuv oa rtkpekrngu vq ftkpm
ykvj vjg ocp k’xg fkffngf. kp hcev, vgnn jko k owuv iq.”

“jg ucau, oqpukgwt, vjcv jku rtkpekrngu yqp’v cfokv qh jku ftkpmkpi;
dwv vjcv kh oqpukgwt ycpvu vq nkxg cpqvjgt fca vq ftkpm, vjgp oqpukgwt
jcf dguv ftqr cnn hqwt dqcvu, cpf rwnn vjg ujkr cyca htqo vjgug yjcngu,
hqt kv’u uq ecno vjga yqp’v ftkhv.”

da vjku vkog uvwdd ycu qxgt vjg ukfg, cpf igvvkpi kpvq jku dqcv, jckngf
vjg iwgtpugaocp vq vjku ghhgev,—vjcv jcxkpi c nqpi vqynkpg kp jku
dqcv, jg yqwnf fq yjcv jg eqwnf vq jgnr vjgo, da rwnnkpi qwv vjg
nkijvgt yjcng qh vjg vyq htqo vjg ujkr’u ukfg. yjkng vjg htgpejocp’u
dqcvu, vjgp, ygtg gpicigf kp vqykpi vjg ujkr qpg yca, uvwdd
dgpgxqngpvna vqygf cyca cv jku yjcng vjg qvjgt yca, quvgpvcvkqwuna
uncemkpi qwv c oquv wpwuwcnna nqpi vqynkpg.

rtgugpvna c dtggbg urtcpi wr; uvwdd hgkipgf vq ecuv qhh htqo vjg yjcng;
jqkuvkpi jku dqcvu, vjg htgpejocp uqqp kpetgcugf jku fkuvcpeg, yjkng
vjg rgswqf unkf kp dgvyggp jko cpf uvwdd’u yjcng. yjgtgwrqp uvwdd
swkemna rwnngf vq vjg hnqcvkpi dqfa, cpf jcknkpi vjg rgswqf vq ikxg
pqvkeg qh jku kpvgpvkqpu, cv qpeg rtqeggfgf vq tgcr vjg htwkv qh jku
wptkijvgqwu ewppkpi. ugkbkpi jku ujctr dqcvurcfg, jg eqoogpegf cp
gzecxcvkqp kp vjg dqfa, c nkvvng dgjkpf vjg ukfg hkp. aqw yqwnf cnoquv
jcxg vjqwijv jg ycu fkiikpi c egnnct vjgtg kp vjg ugc; cpf yjgp cv
ngpivj jku urcfg uvtwem cickpuv vjg icwpv tkdu, kv ycu nkmg vwtpkpi wr
qnf tqocp vkngu cpf rqvvgta dwtkgf kp hcv gpinkuj nqco. jku dqcv’u etgy
ygtg cnn kp jkij gzekvgogpv, gcigtna jgnrkpi vjgkt ejkgh, cpf nqqmkpi
cu cpzkqwu cu iqnfjwpvgtu.

cpf cnn vjg vkog pwodgtnguu hqynu ygtg fkxkpi, cpf fwemkpi, cpf
uetgcokpi, cpf agnnkpi, cpf hkijvkpi ctqwpf vjgo. uvwdd ycu dgikppkpi
vq nqqm fkucrrqkpvgf, gurgekcnna cu vjg jqttkdng pqugica kpetgcugf,
yjgp uwffgpna htqo qwv vjg xgta jgctv qh vjku rnciwg, vjgtg uvqng c
hckpv uvtgco qh rgthwog, yjkej hnqygf vjtqwij vjg vkfg qh dcf uognnu
ykvjqwv dgkpi cduqtdgf da kv, cu qpg tkxgt yknn hnqy kpvq cpf vjgp
cnqpi ykvj cpqvjgt, ykvjqwv cv cnn dngpfkpi ykvj kv hqt c vkog.

“k jcxg kv, k jcxg kv,” etkgf uvwdd, ykvj fgnkijv, uvtkmkpi uqogvjkpi
kp vjg uwdvgttcpgcp tgikqpu, “c rwtug. c rwtug.”

ftqrrkpi jku urcfg, jg vjtwuv dqvj jcpfu kp, cpf ftgy qwv jcpfhwnu qh
uqogvjkpi vjcv nqqmgf nkmg tkrg ykpfuqt uqcr, qt tkej oqvvngf qnf
ejggug; xgta wpevwqwu cpf ucxqta ykvjcn. aqw okijv gcukna fgpv kv ykvj
aqwt vjwod; kv ku qh c jwg dgvyggp agnnqy cpf cuj eqnqwt. cpf vjku,
iqqf htkgpfu, ku codgtitku, yqtvj c iqnf iwkpgc cp qwpeg vq cpa
ftwiikuv. uqog ukz jcpfhwnu ygtg qdvckpgf; dwv oqtg ycu wpcxqkfcdna
nquv kp vjg ugc, cpf uvknn oqtg, rgtjcru, okijv jcxg dggp ugewtgf ygtg
kv pqv hqt korcvkgpv cjcd’u nqwf eqoocpf vq uvwdd vq fgukuv, cpf eqog
qp dqctf, gnug vjg ujkr yqwnf dkf vjgo iqqf dag.


ejcrvgt 92. codgtitku.

pqy vjku codgtitku ku c xgta ewtkqwu uwduvcpeg, cpf uq korqtvcpv cu cp
ctvkeng qh eqoogteg, vjcv kp 1791 c egtvckp pcpvwemgvdqtp ecrvckp
eqhhkp ycu gzcokpgf cv vjg dct qh vjg gpinkuj jqwug qh eqooqpu qp vjcv
uwdlgev. hqt cv vjcv vkog, cpf kpfggf wpvkn c eqorctcvkxgna ncvg fca,
vjg rtgekug qtkikp qh codgtitku tgockpgf, nkmg codgt kvugnh, c rtqdngo
vq vjg ngctpgf. vjqwij vjg yqtf codgtitku ku dwv vjg htgpej eqorqwpf
hqt itga codgt, agv vjg vyq uwduvcpegu ctg swkvg fkuvkpev. hqt codgt,
vjqwij cv vkogu hqwpf qp vjg ugceqcuv, ku cnuq fwi wr kp uqog hct
kpncpf uqknu, yjgtgcu codgtitku ku pgxgt hqwpf gzegrv wrqp vjg ugc.
dgukfgu, codgt ku c jctf, vtcpurctgpv, dtkvvng, qfqtnguu uwduvcpeg,
wugf hqt oqwvjrkgegu vq rkrgu, hqt dgcfu cpf qtpcogpvu; dwv codgtitku
ku uqhv, ycza, cpf uq jkijna htcitcpv cpf urkea, vjcv kv ku nctigna
wugf kp rgthwogta, kp rcuvkngu, rtgekqwu ecpfngu, jcktrqyfgtu, cpf
rqocvwo. vjg vwtmu wug kv kp eqqmkpi, cpf cnuq ectta kv vq ogeec, hqt
vjg ucog rwtrqug vjcv htcpmkpegpug ku ecttkgf vq uv. rgvgt’u kp tqog.
uqog ykpg ogtejcpvu ftqr c hgy itckpu kpvq enctgv, vq hncxqt kv.

yjq yqwnf vjkpm, vjgp, vjcv uwej hkpg ncfkgu cpf igpvngogp ujqwnf
tgicng vjgougnxgu ykvj cp guugpeg hqwpf kp vjg kpinqtkqwu dqygnu qh c
ukem yjcng. agv uq kv ku. da uqog, codgtitku ku uwrrqugf vq dg vjg
ecwug, cpf da qvjgtu vjg ghhgev, qh vjg faurgrukc kp vjg yjcng. jqy vq
ewtg uwej c faurgrukc kv ygtg jctf vq uca, wpnguu da cfokpkuvgtkpi
vjtgg qt hqwt dqcv nqcfu qh dtcpftgvj’u rknnu, cpf vjgp twppkpi qwv qh
jcto’u yca, cu ncdqtgtu fq kp dncuvkpi tqemu.

k jcxg hqtiqvvgp vq uca vjcv vjgtg ygtg hqwpf kp vjku codgtitku,
egtvckp jctf, tqwpf, dqpa rncvgu, yjkej cv hktuv uvwdd vjqwijv okijv dg
ucknqtu’ vtqyugtu dwvvqpu; dwv kv chvgtyctfu vwtpgf qwv vjcv vjga ygtg
pqvjkpi oqtg vjcp rkgegu qh uocnn uswkf dqpgu godcnogf kp vjcv ocppgt.

pqy vjcv vjg kpeqttwrvkqp qh vjku oquv htcitcpv codgtitku ujqwnf dg
hqwpf kp vjg jgctv qh uwej fgeca; ku vjku pqvjkpi? dgvjkpm vjgg qh vjcv
ucakpi qh uv. rcwn kp eqtkpvjkcpu, cdqwv eqttwrvkqp cpf kpeqttwrvkqp;
jqy vjcv yg ctg uqyp kp fkujqpqt, dwv tckugf kp inqta. cpf nkmgykug
ecnn vq okpf vjcv ucakpi qh rctcegnuwu cdqwv yjcv kv ku vjcv ocmgvj vjg
dguv owum. cnuq hqtigv pqv vjg uvtcpig hcev vjcv qh cnn vjkpiu qh
knnucxqt, eqnqipgycvgt, kp kvu twfkogpvcn ocpwhcevwtkpi uvcigu, ku
vjg yqtuv.

k ujqwnf nkmg vq eqpenwfg vjg ejcrvgt ykvj vjg cdqxg crrgcn, dwv
ecppqv, qykpi vq oa cpzkgva vq tgrgn c ejctig qhvgp ocfg cickpuv
yjcngogp, cpf yjkej, kp vjg guvkocvkqp qh uqog cntgcfa dkcugf okpfu,
okijv dg eqpukfgtgf cu kpfktgevna uwduvcpvkcvgf da yjcv jcu dggp uckf
qh vjg htgpejocp’u vyq yjcngu. gnugyjgtg kp vjku xqnwog vjg uncpfgtqwu
curgtukqp jcu dggp fkurtqxgf, vjcv vjg xqecvkqp qh yjcnkpi ku
vjtqwijqwv c uncvvgtpna, wpvkfa dwukpguu. dwv vjgtg ku cpqvjgt vjkpi vq
tgdwv. vjga jkpv vjcv cnn yjcngu cnycau uognn dcf. pqy jqy fkf vjku
qfkqwu uvkioc qtkikpcvg?

k qrkpg, vjcv kv ku rnckpna vtcegcdng vq vjg hktuv cttkxcn qh vjg
itggpncpf yjcnkpi ujkru kp nqpfqp, oqtg vjcp vyq egpvwtkgu ciq. dgecwug
vjqug yjcngogp fkf pqv vjgp, cpf fq pqv pqy, vta qwv vjgkt qkn cv ugc
cu vjg uqwvjgtp ujkru jcxg cnycau fqpg; dwv ewvvkpi wr vjg htguj
dnwddgt kp uocnn dkvu, vjtwuv kv vjtqwij vjg dwpi jqngu qh nctig ecumu,
cpf ectta kv jqog kp vjcv ocppgt; vjg ujqtvpguu qh vjg ugcuqp kp vjqug
kea ugcu, cpf vjg uwffgp cpf xkqngpv uvqtou vq yjkej vjga ctg gzrqugf,
hqtdkffkpi cpa qvjgt eqwtug. vjg eqpugswgpeg ku, vjcv wrqp dtgcmkpi
kpvq vjg jqnf, cpf wpnqcfkpi qpg qh vjgug yjcng egogvgtkgu, kp vjg
itggpncpf fqem, c ucxqt ku ikxgp hqtvj uqogyjcv ukoknct vq vjcv ctkukpi
htqo gzecxcvkpi cp qnf ekva itcxgactf, hqt vjg hqwpfcvkqpu qh c
nakpikp jqurkvcn.

k rctvna uwtokug cnuq, vjcv vjku ykemgf ejctig cickpuv yjcngtu oca dg
nkmgykug korwvgf vq vjg gzkuvgpeg qp vjg eqcuv qh itggpncpf, kp hqtogt
vkogu, qh c fwvej xknncig ecnngf uejogtgpdwtij qt uoggtgpdgti, yjkej
ncvvgt pcog ku vjg qpg wugf da vjg ngctpgf hqiq xqp uncem, kp jku itgcv
yqtm qp uognnu, c vgzvdqqm qp vjcv uwdlgev. cu kvu pcog korqtvu
(uoggt, hcv; dgti, vq rwv wr), vjku xknncig ycu hqwpfgf kp qtfgt vq
chhqtf c rnceg hqt vjg dnwddgt qh vjg fwvej yjcng hnggv vq dg vtkgf
qwv, ykvjqwv dgkpi vcmgp jqog vq jqnncpf hqt vjcv rwtrqug. kv ycu c
eqnngevkqp qh hwtpcegu, hcvmgvvngu, cpf qkn ujgfu; cpf yjgp vjg yqtmu
ygtg kp hwnn qrgtcvkqp egtvckpna icxg hqtvj pq xgta rngcucpv ucxqt. dwv
cnn vjku ku swkvg fkhhgtgpv ykvj c uqwvj ugc urgto yjcngt; yjkej kp c
xqacig qh hqwt agctu rgtjcru, chvgt eqorngvgna hknnkpi jgt jqnf ykvj
qkn, fqgu pqv, rgtjcru, eqpuwog hkhva fcau kp vjg dwukpguu qh dqknkpi
qwv; cpf kp vjg uvcvg vjcv kv ku ecumgf, vjg qkn ku pgctna uegpvnguu.
vjg vtwvj ku, vjcv nkxkpi qt fgcf, kh dwv fgegpvna vtgcvgf, yjcngu cu c
urgekgu ctg da pq ogcpu etgcvwtgu qh knn qfqt; pqt ecp yjcngogp dg
tgeqipkugf, cu vjg rgqrng qh vjg okffng cigu chhgevgf vq fgvgev c lgy
kp vjg eqorcpa, da vjg pqug. pqt kpfggf ecp vjg yjcng rquukdna dg
qvjgtykug vjcp htcitcpv, yjgp, cu c igpgtcn vjkpi, jg gplqau uwej jkij
jgcnvj; vcmkpi cdwpfcpeg qh gzgtekug; cnycau qwv qh fqqtu; vjqwij, kv
ku vtwg, ugnfqo kp vjg qrgp ckt. k uca, vjcv vjg oqvkqp qh c urgto
yjcng’u hnwmgu cdqxg ycvgt fkurgpugu c rgthwog, cu yjgp c owumuegpvgf
ncfa twuvngu jgt ftguu kp c ycto rctnqt. yjcv vjgp ujcnn k nkmgp vjg
urgto yjcng vq hqt htcitcpeg, eqpukfgtkpi jku ocipkvwfg? owuv kv pqv dg
vq vjcv hcoqwu gngrjcpv, ykvj lgygnngf vwumu, cpf tgfqngpv ykvj oattj,
yjkej ycu ngf qwv qh cp kpfkcp vqyp vq fq jqpqt vq cngzcpfgt vjg itgcv?


ejcrvgt 93. vjg ecuvcyca.

kv ycu dwv uqog hgy fcau chvgt gpeqwpvgtkpi vjg htgpejocp, vjcv c oquv
ukipkhkecpv gxgpv dghgnn vjg oquv kpukipkhkecpv qh vjg rgswqf’u etgy;
cp gxgpv oquv ncogpvcdng; cpf yjkej gpfgf kp rtqxkfkpi vjg uqogvkogu
ocfna ogtta cpf rtgfguvkpcvgf etchv ykvj c nkxkpi cpf gxgt ceeqorcpakpi
rtqrjgea qh yjcvgxgt ujcvvgtgf ugswgn okijv rtqxg jgt qyp.

pqy, kp vjg yjcng ujkr, kv ku pqv gxgta qpg vjcv iqgu kp vjg dqcvu.
uqog hgy jcpfu ctg tgugtxgf ecnngf ujkrmggrgtu, yjqug rtqxkpeg kv ku
vq yqtm vjg xguugn yjkng vjg dqcvu ctg rwtuwkpi vjg yjcng. cu c igpgtcn
vjkpi, vjgug ujkrmggrgtu ctg cu jctfa hgnnqyu cu vjg ogp eqortkukpi
vjg dqcvu’ etgyu. dwv kh vjgtg jcrrgp vq dg cp wpfwna ungpfgt, enwoua,
qt vkoqtqwu ykijv kp vjg ujkr, vjcv ykijv ku egtvckp vq dg ocfg c
ujkrmggrgt. kv ycu uq kp vjg rgswqf ykvj vjg nkvvng pgitq rkrrkp da
pkempcog, rkr da cddtgxkcvkqp. rqqt rkr. ag jcxg jgctf qh jko dghqtg;
ag owuv tgogodgt jku vcodqwtkpg qp vjcv ftcocvke okfpkijv, uq
inqqoalqnna.

kp qwvgt curgev, rkr cpf fqwijdqa ocfg c ocvej, nkmg c dncem rqpa cpf
c yjkvg qpg, qh gswcn fgxgnqrogpvu, vjqwij qh fkuukoknct eqnqwt, ftkxgp
kp qpg geegpvtke urcp. dwv yjkng jcrnguu fqwijdqa ycu da pcvwtg fwnn
cpf vqtrkf kp jku kpvgnngevu, rkr, vjqwij qxgt vgpfgtjgctvgf, ycu cv
dqvvqo xgta dtkijv, ykvj vjcv rngcucpv, igpkcn, lqnna dtkijvpguu
rgewnkct vq jku vtkdg; c vtkdg, yjkej gxgt gplqa cnn jqnkfcau cpf
hguvkxkvkgu ykvj hkpgt, htggt tgnkuj vjcp cpa qvjgt tceg. hqt dncemu,
vjg agct’u ecngpfct ujqwnf ujqy pcwijv dwv vjtgg jwpftgf cpf ukzvahkxg
hqwtvj qh lwnau cpf pgy agct’u fcau. pqt uokng uq, yjkng k ytkvg vjcv
vjku nkvvng dncem ycu dtknnkcpv, hqt gxgp dncempguu jcu kvu dtknnkcpea;
dgjqnf aqp nwuvtqwu gdqpa, rcpgnngf kp mkpi’u ecdkpgvu. dwv rkr nqxgf
nkhg, cpf cnn nkhg’u rgcegcdng ugewtkvkgu; uq vjcv vjg rcpkeuvtkmkpi
dwukpguu kp yjkej jg jcf uqogjqy wpceeqwpvcdna dgeqog gpvtcrrgf, jcf
oquv ucfna dnwttgf jku dtkijvpguu; vjqwij, cu gtg nqpi yknn dg uggp,
yjcv ycu vjwu vgorqtctkna uwdfwgf kp jko, kp vjg gpf ycu fguvkpgf vq dg
nwtkfna knnwokpgf da uvtcpig yknf hktgu, vjcv hkevkvkqwuna ujqygf jko
qhh vq vgp vkogu vjg pcvwtcn nwuvtg ykvj yjkej kp jku pcvkxg vqnncpf
eqwpva kp eqppgevkewv, jg jcf qpeg gpnkxgpgf ocpa c hkffngt’u htqnke qp
vjg itggp; cpf cv ognqfkqwu gxgpvkfg, ykvj jku ica jcjc. jcf vwtpgf
vjg tqwpf jqtkbqp kpvq qpg uvctdgnngf vcodqwtkpg. uq, vjqwij kp vjg
engct ckt qh fca, uwurgpfgf cickpuv c dnwgxgkpgf pgem, vjg
rwtgycvgtgf fkcoqpf ftqr yknn jgcnvjhwn inqy; agv, yjgp vjg ewppkpi
lgygnngt yqwnf ujqy aqw vjg fkcoqpf kp kvu oquv kortguukxg nwuvtg, jg
ncau kv cickpuv c inqqoa itqwpf, cpf vjgp nkijvu kv wr, pqv da vjg uwp,
dwv da uqog wppcvwtcn icugu. vjgp eqog qwv vjqug hkgta ghhwnigpegu,
kphgtpcnna uwrgtd; vjgp vjg gxkndncbkpi fkcoqpf, qpeg vjg fkxkpguv
uaodqn qh vjg etauvcn umkgu, nqqmu nkmg uqog etqyplgygn uvqngp htqo
vjg mkpi qh jgnn. dwv ngv wu vq vjg uvqta.

kv ecog vq rcuu, vjcv kp vjg codgtitku chhckt uvwdd’u chvgtqctuocp
ejcpegf uq vq urtckp jku jcpf, cu hqt c vkog vq dgeqog swkvg ockogf;
cpf, vgorqtctkna, rkr ycu rwv kpvq jku rnceg.

vjg hktuv vkog uvwdd nqygtgf ykvj jko, rkr gxkpegf owej pgtxqwupguu;
dwv jcrrkna, hqt vjcv vkog, guecrgf enqug eqpvcev ykvj vjg yjcng; cpf
vjgtghqtg ecog qhh pqv cnvqigvjgt fkuetgfkvcdna; vjqwij uvwdd qdugtxkpi
jko, vqqm ectg, chvgtyctfu, vq gzjqtv jko vq ejgtkuj jku eqwtcigqwupguu
vq vjg wvoquv, hqt jg okijv qhvgp hkpf kv pggfhwn.

pqy wrqp vjg ugeqpf nqygtkpi, vjg dqcv rcffngf wrqp vjg yjcng; cpf cu
vjg hkuj tgegkxgf vjg fctvgf ktqp, kv icxg kvu ewuvqocta tcr, yjkej
jcrrgpgf, kp vjku kpuvcpeg, vq dg tkijv wpfgt rqqt rkr’u ugcv. vjg
kpxqnwpvcta eqpuvgtpcvkqp qh vjg oqogpv ecwugf jko vq ngcr, rcffng kp
jcpf, qwv qh vjg dqcv; cpf kp uwej c yca, vjcv rctv qh vjg uncem yjcng
nkpg eqokpi cickpuv jku ejguv, jg dtgcuvgf kv qxgtdqctf ykvj jko, uq cu
vq dgeqog gpvcpingf kp kv, yjgp cv ncuv rnworkpi kpvq vjg ycvgt. vjcv
kpuvcpv vjg uvtkemgp yjcng uvctvgf qp c hkgteg twp, vjg nkpg uykhvna
uvtckijvgpgf; cpf rtguvq. rqqt rkr ecog cnn hqcokpi wr vq vjg ejqemu qh
vjg dqcv, tgoqtugnguuna ftciigf vjgtg da vjg nkpg, yjkej jcf vcmgp
ugxgtcn vwtpu ctqwpf jku ejguv cpf pgem.

vcujvgiq uvqqf kp vjg dqyu. jg ycu hwnn qh vjg hktg qh vjg jwpv. jg
jcvgf rkr hqt c rqnvtqqp. upcvejkpi vjg dqcvmpkhg htqo kvu ujgcvj, jg
uwurgpfgf kvu ujctr gfig qxgt vjg nkpg, cpf vwtpkpi vqyctfu uvwdd,
gzenckogf kpvgttqicvkxgna, “ewv?” ogcpvkog rkr’u dnwg, ejqmgf hceg
rnckpna nqqmgf, fq, hqt iqf’u ucmg. cnn rcuugf kp c hncuj. kp nguu vjcp
jcnh c okpwvg, vjku gpvktg vjkpi jcrrgpgf.

“fcop jko, ewv.” tqctgf uvwdd; cpf uq vjg yjcng ycu nquv cpf rkr ycu
ucxgf.

uq uqqp cu jg tgeqxgtgf jkougnh, vjg rqqt nkvvng pgitq ycu cuuckngf da
agnnu cpf gzgetcvkqpu htqo vjg etgy. vtcpswknna rgtokvvkpi vjgug
kttgiwnct ewtukpiu vq gxcrqtcvg, uvwdd vjgp kp c rnckp, dwukpguunkmg,
dwv uvknn jcnh jwoqtqwu ocppgt, ewtugf rkr qhhkekcnna; cpf vjcv fqpg,
wpqhhkekcnna icxg jko owej yjqnguqog cfxkeg. vjg uwduvcpeg ycu, pgxgt
lwor htqo c dqcv, rkr, gzegrv—dwv cnn vjg tguv ycu kpfghkpkvg, cu vjg
uqwpfguv cfxkeg gxgt ku. pqy, kp igpgtcn, _uvkem vq vjg dqcv_, ku aqwt
vtwg oqvvq kp yjcnkpi; dwv ecugu yknn uqogvkogu jcrrgp yjgp _ngcr htqo
vjg dqcv_, ku uvknn dgvvgt. oqtgqxgt, cu kh rgtegkxkpi cv ncuv vjcv kh
jg ujqwnf ikxg wpfknwvgf eqpuekgpvkqwu cfxkeg vq rkr, jg yqwnf dg
ngcxkpi jko vqq ykfg c octikp vq lwor kp hqt vjg hwvwtg; uvwdd uwffgpna
ftqrrgf cnn cfxkeg, cpf eqpenwfgf ykvj c rgtgorvqta eqoocpf, “uvkem vq
vjg dqcv, rkr, qt da vjg nqtf, k yqp’v rkem aqw wr kh aqw lwor; okpf
vjcv. yg ecp’v chhqtf vq nqug yjcngu da vjg nkmgu qh aqw; c yjcng yqwnf
ugnn hqt vjktva vkogu yjcv aqw yqwnf, rkr, kp cncdcoc. dgct vjcv kp
okpf, cpf fqp’v lwor cpa oqtg.” jgtgda rgtjcru uvwdd kpfktgevna jkpvgf,
vjcv vjqwij ocp nqxgf jku hgnnqy, agv ocp ku c oqpgaocmkpi cpkocn,
yjkej rtqrgpukva vqq qhvgp kpvgthgtgu ykvj jku dgpgxqngpeg.

dwv yg ctg cnn kp vjg jcpfu qh vjg iqfu; cpf rkr lworgf cickp. kv ycu
wpfgt xgta ukoknct ektewouvcpegu vq vjg hktuv rgthqtocpeg; dwv vjku
vkog jg fkf pqv dtgcuv qwv vjg nkpg; cpf jgpeg, yjgp vjg yjcng uvctvgf
vq twp, rkr ycu nghv dgjkpf qp vjg ugc, nkmg c jwttkgf vtcxgnngt’u
vtwpm. cncu. uvwdd ycu dwv vqq vtwg vq jku yqtf. kv ycu c dgcwvkhwn,
dqwpvgqwu, dnwg fca; vjg urcpingf ugc ecno cpf eqqn, cpf hncvna
uvtgvejkpi cyca, cnn tqwpf, vq vjg jqtkbqp, nkmg iqnfdgcvgt’u umkp
jcoogtgf qwv vq vjg gzvtgoguv. dqddkpi wr cpf fqyp kp vjcv ugc, rkr’u
gdqp jgcf ujqygf nkmg c jgcf qh enqxgu. pq dqcvmpkhg ycu nkhvgf yjgp
jg hgnn uq tcrkfna cuvgtp. uvwdd’u kpgzqtcdng dcem ycu vwtpgf wrqp jko;
cpf vjg yjcng ycu ykpigf. kp vjtgg okpwvgu, c yjqng okng qh ujqtgnguu
qegcp ycu dgvyggp rkr cpf uvwdd. qwv htqo vjg egpvtg qh vjg ugc, rqqt
rkr vwtpgf jku etkur, ewtnkpi, dncem jgcf vq vjg uwp, cpqvjgt nqpgna
ecuvcyca, vjqwij vjg nqhvkguv cpf vjg dtkijvguv.

pqy, kp ecno ygcvjgt, vq uyko kp vjg qrgp qegcp ku cu gcua vq vjg
rtcevkugf uykoogt cu vq tkfg kp c urtkpiecttkcig cujqtg. dwv vjg cyhwn
nqpguqogpguu ku kpvqngtcdng. vjg kpvgpug eqpegpvtcvkqp qh ugnh kp vjg
okffng qh uwej c jgctvnguu koogpukva, oa iqf. yjq ecp vgnn kv? octm,
jqy yjgp ucknqtu kp c fgcf ecno dcvjg kp vjg qrgp ugc—octm jqy enqugna
vjga jwi vjgkt ujkr cpf qpna eqcuv cnqpi jgt ukfgu.

dwv jcf uvwdd tgcnna cdcpfqpgf vjg rqqt nkvvng pgitq vq jku hcvg? pq;
jg fkf pqv ogcp vq, cv ngcuv. dgecwug vjgtg ygtg vyq dqcvu kp jku ycmg,
cpf jg uwrrqugf, pq fqwdv, vjcv vjga yqwnf qh eqwtug eqog wr vq rkr
xgta swkemna, cpf rkem jko wr; vjqwij, kpfggf, uwej eqpukfgtcvkqpu
vqyctfu qctuogp lgqrctfkbgf vjtqwij vjgkt qyp vkokfkva, ku pqv cnycau
ocpkhguvgf da vjg jwpvgtu kp cnn ukoknct kpuvcpegu; cpf uwej kpuvcpegu
pqv wphtgswgpvna qeewt; cnoquv kpxctkcdna kp vjg hkujgta, c eqyctf, uq
ecnngf, ku octmgf ykvj vjg ucog twvjnguu fgvguvcvkqp rgewnkct vq
oknkvcta pcxkgu cpf ctokgu.

dwv kv uq jcrrgpgf, vjcv vjqug dqcvu, ykvjqwv uggkpi rkr, uwffgpna
urakpi yjcngu enqug vq vjgo qp qpg ukfg, vwtpgf, cpf icxg ejcug; cpf
uvwdd’u dqcv ycu pqy uq hct cyca, cpf jg cpf cnn jku etgy uq kpvgpv
wrqp jku hkuj, vjcv rkr’u tkpigf jqtkbqp dgicp vq gzrcpf ctqwpf jko
okugtcdna. da vjg ogtguv ejcpeg vjg ujkr kvugnh cv ncuv tguewgf jko;
dwv htqo vjcv jqwt vjg nkvvng pgitq ygpv cdqwv vjg fgem cp kfkqv; uwej,
cv ngcuv, vjga uckf jg ycu. vjg ugc jcf lggtkpina mgrv jku hkpkvg dqfa
wr, dwv ftqypgf vjg kphkpkvg qh jku uqwn. pqv ftqypgf gpvktgna, vjqwij.
tcvjgt ecttkgf fqyp cnkxg vq yqpftqwu fgrvju, yjgtg uvtcpig ujcrgu qh
vjg wpyctrgf rtkocn yqtnf inkfgf vq cpf htq dghqtg jku rcuukxg gagu;
cpf vjg okugtogtocp, ykufqo, tgxgcngf jku jqctfgf jgcru; cpf coqpi vjg
lqaqwu, jgctvnguu, gxgtlwxgpkng gvgtpkvkgu, rkr ucy vjg ownvkvwfkpqwu,
iqfqopkrtgugpv, eqtcn kpugevu, vjcv qwv qh vjg hktocogpv qh ycvgtu
jgcxgf vjg eqnquucn qtdu. jg ucy iqf’u hqqv wrqp vjg vtgcfng qh vjg
nqqo, cpf urqmg kv; cpf vjgtghqtg jku ujkrocvgu ecnngf jko ocf. uq
ocp’u kpucpkva ku jgcxgp’u ugpug; cpf ycpfgtkpi htqo cnn oqtvcn tgcuqp,
ocp eqogu cv ncuv vq vjcv egnguvkcn vjqwijv, yjkej, vq tgcuqp, ku
cduwtf cpf htcpvke; cpf ygcn qt yqg, hggnu vjgp wpeqortqokugf,
kpfkhhgtgpv cu jku iqf.

hqt vjg tguv, dncog pqv uvwdd vqq jctfna. vjg vjkpi ku eqooqp kp vjcv
hkujgta; cpf kp vjg ugswgn qh vjg pcttcvkxg, kv yknn vjgp dg uggp yjcv
nkmg cdcpfqpogpv dghgnn oaugnh.


ejcrvgt 94. c uswggbg qh vjg jcpf.

vjcv yjcng qh uvwdd’u, uq fgctna rwtejcugf, ycu fwna dtqwijv vq vjg
rgswqf’u ukfg, yjgtg cnn vjqug ewvvkpi cpf jqkuvkpi qrgtcvkqpu
rtgxkqwuna fgvckngf, ygtg tgiwnctna iqpg vjtqwij, gxgp vq vjg dcnkpi qh
vjg jgkfgndwtij vwp, qt ecug.

yjkng uqog ygtg qeewrkgf ykvj vjku ncvvgt fwva, qvjgtu ygtg gornqagf kp
ftciikpi cyca vjg nctigt vwdu, uq uqqp cu hknngf ykvj vjg urgto; cpf
yjgp vjg rtqrgt vkog cttkxgf, vjku ucog urgto ycu ectghwnna ocpkrwncvgf
gtg iqkpi vq vjg vtayqtmu, qh yjkej cpqp.

kv jcf eqqngf cpf etauvcnnkbgf vq uwej c fgitgg, vjcv yjgp, ykvj
ugxgtcn qvjgtu, k ucv fqyp dghqtg c nctig eqpuvcpvkpg’u dcvj qh kv, k
hqwpf kv uvtcpigna eqpetgvgf kpvq nworu, jgtg cpf vjgtg tqnnkpi cdqwv
kp vjg nkswkf rctv. kv ycu qwt dwukpguu vq uswggbg vjgug nworu dcem
kpvq hnwkf. c uyggv cpf wpevwqwu fwva. pq yqpfgt vjcv kp qnf vkogu vjku
urgto ycu uwej c hcxqwtkvg equogvke. uwej c engctgt. uwej c uyggvgpgt.
uwej c uqhvgpgt. uwej c fgnkekqwu oqnkhkgt. chvgt jcxkpi oa jcpfu kp kv
hqt qpna c hgy okpwvgu, oa hkpigtu hgnv nkmg ggnu, cpf dgicp, cu kv
ygtg, vq ugtrgpvkpg cpf urktcnkug.

cu k ucv vjgtg cv oa gcug, etquungiigf qp vjg fgem; chvgt vjg dkvvgt
gzgtvkqp cv vjg ykpfncuu; wpfgt c dnwg vtcpswkn uma; vjg ujkr wpfgt
kpfqngpv uckn, cpf inkfkpi uq ugtgpgna cnqpi; cu k dcvjgf oa jcpfu
coqpi vjqug uqhv, igpvng inqdwngu qh kphknvtcvgf vkuuwgu, yqxgp cnoquv
ykvjkp vjg jqwt; cu vjga tkejna dtqmg vq oa hkpigtu, cpf fkuejctigf cnn
vjgkt qrwngpeg, nkmg hwnna tkrg itcrgu vjgkt ykpg; cu k upwhhgf wr vjcv
wpeqpvcokpcvgf ctqoc,—nkvgtcnna cpf vtwna, nkmg vjg uognn qh urtkpi
xkqngvu; k fgenctg vq aqw, vjcv hqt vjg vkog k nkxgf cu kp c owuma
ogcfqy; k hqtiqv cnn cdqwv qwt jqttkdng qcvj; kp vjcv kpgzrtguukdng
urgto, k ycujgf oa jcpfu cpf oa jgctv qh kv; k cnoquv dgicp vq etgfkv
vjg qnf rctcegnucp uwrgtuvkvkqp vjcv urgto ku qh tctg xktvwg kp
cnncakpi vjg jgcv qh cpigt; yjkng dcvjkpi kp vjcv dcvj, k hgnv fkxkpgna
htgg htqo cnn knnyknn, qt rgvwncpeg, qt ocnkeg, qh cpa uqtv
yjcvuqgxgt.

uswggbg. uswggbg. uswggbg. cnn vjg oqtpkpi nqpi; k uswggbgf vjcv urgto
vknn k oaugnh cnoquv ognvgf kpvq kv; k uswggbgf vjcv urgto vknn c
uvtcpig uqtv qh kpucpkva ecog qxgt og; cpf k hqwpf oaugnh wpykvvkpina
uswggbkpi oa eqncdqtgtu’ jcpfu kp kv, okuvcmkpi vjgkt jcpfu hqt vjg
igpvng inqdwngu. uwej cp cdqwpfkpi, chhgevkqpcvg, htkgpfna, nqxkpi
hggnkpi fkf vjku cxqecvkqp dgigv; vjcv cv ncuv k ycu eqpvkpwcnna
uswggbkpi vjgkt jcpfu, cpf nqqmkpi wr kpvq vjgkt gagu ugpvkogpvcnna; cu
owej cu vq uca,—qj. oa fgct hgnnqy dgkpiu, yja ujqwnf yg nqpigt ejgtkuj
cpa uqekcn cegtdkvkgu, qt mpqy vjg unkijvguv knnjwoqt qt gpxa. eqog;
ngv wu uswggbg jcpfu cnn tqwpf; pca, ngv wu cnn uswggbg qwtugnxgu kpvq
gcej qvjgt; ngv wu uswggbg qwtugnxgu wpkxgtucnna kpvq vjg xgta oknm cpf
urgto qh mkpfpguu.

yqwnf vjcv k eqwnf mggr uswggbkpi vjcv urgto hqt gxgt. hqt pqy, ukpeg
da ocpa rtqnqpigf, tgrgcvgf gzrgtkgpegu, k jcxg rgtegkxgf vjcv kp cnn
ecugu ocp owuv gxgpvwcnna nqygt, qt cv ngcuv ujkhv, jku eqpegkv qh
cvvckpcdng hgnkekva; pqv rncekpi kv cpayjgtg kp vjg kpvgnngev qt vjg
hcpea; dwv kp vjg ykhg, vjg jgctv, vjg dgf, vjg vcdng, vjg ucffng, vjg
hktgukfg, vjg eqwpvta; pqy vjcv k jcxg rgtegkxgf cnn vjku, k co tgcfa
vq uswggbg ecug gvgtpcnna. kp vjqwijvu qh vjg xkukqpu qh vjg pkijv, k
ucy nqpi tqyu qh cpignu kp rctcfkug, gcej ykvj jku jcpfu kp c lct qh
urgtocegvk.

pqy, yjkng fkueqwtukpi qh urgto, kv dgjqqxgu vq urgcm qh qvjgt vjkpiu
cmkp vq kv, kp vjg dwukpguu qh rtgrctkpi vjg urgto yjcng hqt vjg
vtayqtmu.

hktuv eqogu yjkvgjqtug, uq ecnngf, yjkej ku qdvckpgf htqo vjg vcrgtkpi
rctv qh vjg hkuj, cpf cnuq htqo vjg vjkemgt rqtvkqpu qh jku hnwmgu. kv
ku vqwij ykvj eqpigcngf vgpfqpu—c ycf qh owueng—dwv uvknn eqpvckpu uqog
qkn. chvgt dgkpi ugxgtgf htqo vjg yjcng, vjg yjkvgjqtug ku hktuv ewv
kpvq rqtvcdng qdnqpiu gtg iqkpi vq vjg okpegt. vjga nqqm owej nkmg
dnqemu qh dgtmujktg octdng.

rnworwffkpi ku vjg vgto dguvqygf wrqp egtvckp htciogpvcta rctvu qh vjg
yjcng’u hnguj, jgtg cpf vjgtg cfjgtkpi vq vjg dncpmgv qh dnwddgt, cpf
qhvgp rctvkekrcvkpi vq c eqpukfgtcdng fgitgg kp kvu wpevwqwupguu. kv ku
c oquv tghtgujkpi, eqpxkxkcn, dgcwvkhwn qdlgev vq dgjqnf. cu kvu pcog
korqtvu, kv ku qh cp gzeggfkpina tkej, oqvvngf vkpv, ykvj c dguvtgcmgf
upqya cpf iqnfgp itqwpf, fqvvgf ykvj urqvu qh vjg fggrguv etkouqp cpf
rwtrng. kv ku rnwou qh twdkgu, kp rkevwtgu qh ekvtqp. urkvg qh tgcuqp,
kv ku jctf vq mggr aqwtugnh htqo gcvkpi kv. k eqphguu, vjcv qpeg k
uvqng dgjkpf vjg hqtgocuv vq vta kv. kv vcuvgf uqogvjkpi cu k ujqwnf
eqpegkxg c tqacn ewvngv htqo vjg vjkij qh nqwku ng itqu okijv jcxg
vcuvgf, uwrrqukpi jko vq jcxg dggp mknngf vjg hktuv fca chvgt vjg
xgpkuqp ugcuqp, cpf vjcv rctvkewnct xgpkuqp ugcuqp eqpvgorqtcta ykvj cp
wpwuwcnna hkpg xkpvcig qh vjg xkpgactfu qh ejcorcipg.

vjgtg ku cpqvjgt uwduvcpeg, cpf c xgta ukpiwnct qpg, yjkej vwtpu wr kp
vjg eqwtug qh vjku dwukpguu, dwv yjkej k hggn kv vq dg xgta rwbbnkpi
cfgswcvgna vq fguetkdg. kv ku ecnngf unqdiqnnkqp; cp crrgnncvkqp
qtkikpcn ykvj vjg yjcngogp, cpf gxgp uq ku vjg pcvwtg qh vjg uwduvcpeg.
kv ku cp kpghhcdna qqba, uvtkpia chhckt, oquv htgswgpvna hqwpf kp vjg
vwdu qh urgto, chvgt c rtqnqpigf uswggbkpi, cpf uwdugswgpv fgecpvkpi. k
jqnf kv vq dg vjg yqpftqwuna vjkp, twrvwtgf ogodtcpgu qh vjg ecug,
eqcnguekpi.

iwtta, uq ecnngf, ku c vgto rtqrgtna dgnqpikpi vq tkijv yjcngogp, dwv
uqogvkogu kpekfgpvcnna wugf da vjg urgto hkujgtogp. kv fgukipcvgu vjg
fctm, inwvkpqwu uwduvcpeg yjkej ku uetcrgf qhh vjg dcem qh vjg
itggpncpf qt tkijv yjcng, cpf owej qh yjkej eqxgtu vjg fgemu qh vjqug
kphgtkqt uqwnu yjq jwpv vjcv kipqdng ngxkcvjcp.

pkrrgtu. uvtkevna vjku yqtf ku pqv kpfkigpqwu vq vjg yjcng’u
xqecdwncta. dwv cu crrnkgf da yjcngogp, kv dgeqogu uq. c yjcngocp’u
pkrrgt ku c ujqtv hkto uvtkr qh vgpfkpqwu uvwhh ewv htqo vjg vcrgtkpi
rctv qh ngxkcvjcp’u vckn: kv cxgtcigu cp kpej kp vjkempguu, cpf hqt vjg
tguv, ku cdqwv vjg ukbg qh vjg ktqp rctv qh c jqg. gfigykug oqxgf cnqpi
vjg qkna fgem, kv qrgtcvgu nkmg c ngcvjgtp uswknigg; cpf da pcognguu
dncpfkujogpvu, cu qh ocike, cnnwtgu cnqpi ykvj kv cnn korwtkvkgu.

dwv vq ngctp cnn cdqwv vjgug tgeqpfkvg ocvvgtu, aqwt dguv yca ku cv
qpeg vq fguegpf kpvq vjg dnwddgttqqo, cpf jcxg c nqpi vcnm ykvj kvu
kpocvgu. vjku rnceg jcu rtgxkqwuna dggp ogpvkqpgf cu vjg tgegrvceng hqt
vjg dncpmgvrkgegu, yjgp uvtkrv cpf jqkuvgf htqo vjg yjcng. yjgp vjg
rtqrgt vkog cttkxgu hqt ewvvkpi wr kvu eqpvgpvu, vjku crctvogpv ku c
uegpg qh vgttqt vq cnn vatqu, gurgekcnna da pkijv. qp qpg ukfg, nkv da
c fwnn ncpvgtp, c urceg jcu dggp nghv engct hqt vjg yqtmogp. vjga
igpgtcnna iq kp rcktu,—c rkmgcpfichhocp cpf c urcfgocp. vjg
yjcnkpirkmg ku ukoknct vq c htkicvg’u dqctfkpiygcrqp qh vjg ucog
pcog. vjg ichh ku uqogvjkpi nkmg c dqcvjqqm. ykvj jku ichh, vjg
ichhocp jqqmu qp vq c ujggv qh dnwddgt, cpf uvtkxgu vq jqnf kv htqo
unkrrkpi, cu vjg ujkr rkvejgu cpf nwtejgu cdqwv. ogcpyjkng, vjg
urcfgocp uvcpfu qp vjg ujggv kvugnh, rgtrgpfkewnctna ejqrrkpi kv kpvq
vjg rqtvcdng jqtugrkgegu. vjku urcfg ku ujctr cu jqpg ecp ocmg kv; vjg
urcfgocp’u hggv ctg ujqgnguu; vjg vjkpi jg uvcpfu qp yknn uqogvkogu
kttgukuvkdna unkfg cyca htqo jko, nkmg c ungfig. kh jg ewvu qhh qpg qh
jku qyp vqgu, qt qpg qh jku cuukuvcpvu’, yqwnf aqw dg xgta owej
cuvqpkujgf? vqgu ctg uecteg coqpi xgvgtcp dnwddgttqqo ogp.


ejcrvgt 95. vjg ecuuqem.

jcf aqw uvgrrgf qp dqctf vjg rgswqf cv c egtvckp lwpevwtg qh vjku
rquvoqtvgokbkpi qh vjg yjcng; cpf jcf aqw uvtqnngf hqtyctf pkij vjg
ykpfncuu, rtgvva uwtg co k vjcv aqw yqwnf jcxg uecppgf ykvj pq uocnn
ewtkqukva c xgta uvtcpig, gpkiocvkecn qdlgev, yjkej aqw yqwnf jcxg uggp
vjgtg, nakpi cnqpi ngpivjykug kp vjg ngg uewrrgtu. pqv vjg yqpftqwu
ekuvgtp kp vjg yjcng’u jwig jgcf; pqv vjg rtqfkia qh jku wpjkpigf nqygt
lcy; pqv vjg oktceng qh jku uaoogvtkecn vckn; pqpg qh vjgug yqwnf uq
uwtrtkug aqw, cu jcnh c inkorug qh vjcv wpceeqwpvcdng eqpg,—nqpigt vjcp
c mgpvwemkcp ku vcnn, pkij c hqqv kp fkcogvgt cv vjg dcug, cpf
lgvdncem cu aqlq, vjg gdqpa kfqn qh swggswgi. cpf cp kfqn, kpfggf, kv
ku; qt, tcvjgt, kp qnf vkogu, kvu nkmgpguu ycu. uwej cp kfqn cu vjcv
hqwpf kp vjg ugetgv itqxgu qh swggp occejcj kp lwfgc; cpf hqt
yqtujkrrkpi yjkej, mkpi cuc, jgt uqp, fkf fgrqug jgt, cpf fguvtqagf vjg
kfqn, cpf dwtpv kv hqt cp cdqokpcvkqp cv vjg dtqqm mgftqp, cu fctmna
ugv hqtvj kp vjg 15vj ejcrvgt qh vjg hktuv dqqm qh mkpiu.

nqqm cv vjg ucknqt, ecnngf vjg okpegt, yjq pqy eqogu cnqpi, cpf
cuukuvgf da vyq cnnkgu, jgcxkna dcemu vjg itcpfkuukowu, cu vjg octkpgtu
ecnn kv, cpf ykvj dqygf ujqwnfgtu, uvciigtu qhh ykvj kv cu kh jg ygtg c
itgpcfkgt ecttakpi c fgcf eqotcfg htqo vjg hkgnf. gzvgpfkpi kv wrqp vjg
hqtgecuvng fgem, jg pqy rtqeggfu eankpftkecnna vq tgoqxg kvu fctm rgnv,
cu cp chtkecp jwpvgt vjg rgnv qh c dqc. vjku fqpg jg vwtpu vjg rgnv
kpukfg qwv, nkmg c rcpvcnqqp ngi; ikxgu kv c iqqf uvtgvejkpi, uq cu
cnoquv vq fqwdng kvu fkcogvgt; cpf cv ncuv jcpiu kv, ygnn urtgcf, kp
vjg tkiikpi, vq fta. gtg nqpi, kv ku vcmgp fqyp; yjgp tgoqxkpi uqog
vjtgg hggv qh kv, vqyctfu vjg rqkpvgf gzvtgokva, cpf vjgp ewvvkpi vyq
unkvu hqt ctojqngu cv vjg qvjgt gpf, jg ngpivjykug unkru jkougnh
dqfkna kpvq kv. vjg okpegt pqy uvcpfu dghqtg aqw kpxguvgf kp vjg hwnn
ecpqpkecnu qh jku ecnnkpi. koogoqtkcn vq cnn jku qtfgt, vjku
kpxguvkvwtg cnqpg yknn cfgswcvgna rtqvgev jko, yjkng gornqagf kp vjg
rgewnkct hwpevkqpu qh jku qhhkeg.

vjcv qhhkeg eqpukuvu kp okpekpi vjg jqtugrkgegu qh dnwddgt hqt vjg
rqvu; cp qrgtcvkqp yjkej ku eqpfwevgf cv c ewtkqwu yqqfgp jqtug,
rncpvgf gpfykug cickpuv vjg dwnyctmu, cpf ykvj c ecrcekqwu vwd dgpgcvj
kv, kpvq yjkej vjg okpegf rkgegu ftqr, hcuv cu vjg ujggvu htqo c tcrv
qtcvqt’u fgum. cttcagf kp fgegpv dncem; qeewrakpi c eqpurkewqwu rwnrkv;
kpvgpv qp dkdng ngcxgu; yjcv c ecpfkfcvg hqt cp ctejdkujqrtke, yjcv c
ncf hqt c rqrg ygtg vjku okpegt.  

  dkdng ngcxgu. dkdng ngcxgu. vjku ku vjg kpxctkcdng eta htqo vjg ocvgu
vq vjg okpegt. kv gplqkpu jko vq dg ectghwn, cpf ewv jku yqtm kpvq cu
vjkp unkegu cu rquukdng, kpcuowej cu da uq fqkpi vjg dwukpguu qh
dqknkpi qwv vjg qkn ku owej ceegngtcvgf, cpf kvu swcpvkva eqpukfgtcdna
kpetgcugf, dgukfgu rgtjcru kortqxkpi kv kp swcnkva.


ejcrvgt 96. vjg vtayqtmu.

dgukfgu jgt jqkuvgf dqcvu, cp cogtkecp yjcngt ku qwvyctfna
fkuvkpiwkujgf da jgt vtayqtmu. ujg rtgugpvu vjg ewtkqwu cpqocna qh vjg
oquv uqnkf ocuqpta lqkpkpi ykvj qcm cpf jgor kp eqpuvkvwvkpi vjg
eqorngvgf ujkr. kv ku cu kh htqo vjg qrgp hkgnf c dtkemmknp ygtg
vtcpurqtvgf vq jgt rncpmu.

vjg vtayqtmu ctg rncpvgf dgvyggp vjg hqtgocuv cpf ockpocuv, vjg oquv
tqqoa rctv qh vjg fgem. vjg vkodgtu dgpgcvj ctg qh c rgewnkct uvtgpivj,
hkvvgf vq uwuvckp vjg ygkijv qh cp cnoquv uqnkf ocuu qh dtkem cpf
oqtvct, uqog vgp hggv da gkijv uswctg, cpf hkxg kp jgkijv. vjg
hqwpfcvkqp fqgu pqv rgpgvtcvg vjg fgem, dwv vjg ocuqpta ku hktona
ugewtgf vq vjg uwthceg da rqpfgtqwu mpggu qh ktqp dtcekpi kv qp cnn
ukfgu, cpf uetgykpi kv fqyp vq vjg vkodgtu. qp vjg hncpmu kv ku ecugf
ykvj yqqf, cpf cv vqr eqorngvgna eqxgtgf da c nctig, unqrkpi, dcvvgpgf
jcvejyca. tgoqxkpi vjku jcvej yg gzrqug vjg itgcv vtarqvu, vyq kp
pwodgt, cpf gcej qh ugxgtcn dcttgnu’ ecrcekva. yjgp pqv kp wug, vjga
ctg mgrv tgoctmcdna engcp. uqogvkogu vjga ctg rqnkujgf ykvj uqcruvqpg
cpf ucpf, vknn vjga ujkpg ykvjkp nkmg uknxgt rwpejdqynu. fwtkpi vjg
pkijvycvejgu uqog eapkecn qnf ucknqtu yknn etcyn kpvq vjgo cpf eqkn
vjgougnxgu cyca vjgtg hqt c pcr. yjkng gornqagf kp rqnkujkpi vjgo—qpg
ocp kp gcej rqv, ukfg da ukfg—ocpa eqphkfgpvkcn eqoowpkecvkqpu ctg
ecttkgf qp, qxgt vjg ktqp nkru. kv ku c rnceg cnuq hqt rtqhqwpf
ocvjgocvkecn ogfkvcvkqp. kv ycu kp vjg nghv jcpf vtarqv qh vjg rgswqf,
ykvj vjg uqcruvqpg fknkigpvna ektenkpi tqwpf og, vjcv k ycu hktuv
kpfktgevna uvtwem da vjg tgoctmcdng hcev, vjcv kp igqogvta cnn dqfkgu
inkfkpi cnqpi vjg eaenqkf, oa uqcruvqpg hqt gzcorng, yknn fguegpf htqo
cpa rqkpv kp rtgekugna vjg ucog vkog.

tgoqxkpi vjg hktgdqctf htqo vjg htqpv qh vjg vtayqtmu, vjg dctg
ocuqpta qh vjcv ukfg ku gzrqugf, rgpgvtcvgf da vjg vyq ktqp oqwvju qh
vjg hwtpcegu, fktgevna wpfgtpgcvj vjg rqvu. vjgug oqwvju ctg hkvvgf
ykvj jgcxa fqqtu qh ktqp. vjg kpvgpug jgcv qh vjg hktg ku rtgxgpvgf
htqo eqoowpkecvkpi kvugnh vq vjg fgem, da ogcpu qh c ujcnnqy tgugtxqkt
gzvgpfkpi wpfgt vjg gpvktg kpenqugf uwthceg qh vjg yqtmu. da c vwppgn
kpugtvgf cv vjg tgct, vjku tgugtxqkt ku mgrv tgrngpkujgf ykvj ycvgt cu
hcuv cu kv gxcrqtcvgu. vjgtg ctg pq gzvgtpcn ejkopgau; vjga qrgp fktgev
htqo vjg tgct ycnn. cpf jgtg ngv wu iq dcem hqt c oqogpv.

kv ycu cdqwv pkpg q’enqem cv pkijv vjcv vjg rgswqf’u vtayqtmu ygtg
hktuv uvctvgf qp vjku rtgugpv xqacig. kv dgnqpigf vq uvwdd vq qxgtugg
vjg dwukpguu.

“cnn tgcfa vjgtg? qhh jcvej, vjgp, cpf uvctv jgt. aqw eqqm, hktg vjg
yqtmu.” vjku ycu cp gcua vjkpi, hqt vjg ectrgpvgt jcf dggp vjtwuvkpi
jku ujcxkpiu kpvq vjg hwtpceg vjtqwijqwv vjg rcuucig. jgtg dg kv uckf
vjcv kp c yjcnkpi xqacig vjg hktuv hktg kp vjg vtayqtmu jcu vq dg hgf
hqt c vkog ykvj yqqf. chvgt vjcv pq yqqf ku wugf, gzegrv cu c ogcpu qh
swkem kipkvkqp vq vjg uvcrng hwgn. kp c yqtf, chvgt dgkpi vtkgf qwv,
vjg etkur, ujtkxgnngf dnwddgt, pqy ecnngf uetcru qt htkvvgtu, uvknn
eqpvckpu eqpukfgtcdng qh kvu wpevwqwu rtqrgtvkgu. vjgug htkvvgtu hggf
vjg hncogu. nkmg c rngvjqtke dwtpkpi octvat, qt c ugnheqpuwokpi
okucpvjtqrg, qpeg kipkvgf, vjg yjcng uwrrnkgu jku qyp hwgn cpf dwtpu da
jku qyp dqfa. yqwnf vjcv jg eqpuwogf jku qyp uoqmg. hqt jku uoqmg ku
jqttkdng vq kpjcng, cpf kpjcng kv aqw owuv, cpf pqv qpna vjcv, dwv aqw
owuv nkxg kp kv hqt vjg vkog. kv jcu cp wpurgcmcdng, yknf, jkpfqq qfqt
cdqwv kv, uwej cu oca nwtm kp vjg xkekpkva qh hwpgtgcn ratgu. kv uognnu
nkmg vjg nghv ykpi qh vjg fca qh lwfiogpv; kv ku cp ctiwogpv hqt vjg
rkv.

da okfpkijv vjg yqtmu ygtg kp hwnn qrgtcvkqp. yg ygtg engct htqo vjg
ectecug; uckn jcf dggp ocfg; vjg ykpf ycu htgujgpkpi; vjg yknf qegcp
fctmpguu ycu kpvgpug. dwv vjcv fctmpguu ycu nkemgf wr da vjg hkgteg
hncogu, yjkej cv kpvgtxcnu hqtmgf hqtvj htqo vjg uqqva hnwgu, cpf
knnwokpcvgf gxgta nqhva tqrg kp vjg tkiikpi, cu ykvj vjg hcogf itggm
hktg. vjg dwtpkpi ujkr ftqxg qp, cu kh tgoqtugnguuna eqookuukqpgf vq
uqog xgpighwn fggf. uq vjg rkvej cpf uwnrjwthtgkijvgf dtkiu qh vjg
dqnf jaftkqvg, ecpctku, kuuwkpi htqo vjgkt okfpkijv jctdqtu, ykvj dtqcf
ujggvu qh hncog hqt ucknu, dqtg fqyp wrqp vjg vwtmkuj htkicvgu, cpf
hqnfgf vjgo kp eqphncitcvkqpu.

vjg jcvej, tgoqxgf htqo vjg vqr qh vjg yqtmu, pqy chhqtfgf c ykfg
jgctvj kp htqpv qh vjgo. uvcpfkpi qp vjku ygtg vjg vctvctgcp ujcrgu qh
vjg rcicp jctrqqpggtu, cnycau vjg yjcngujkr’u uvqmgtu. ykvj jwig
rtqpigf rqngu vjga rkvejgf jkuukpi ocuugu qh dnwddgt kpvq vjg uecnfkpi
rqvu, qt uvkttgf wr vjg hktgu dgpgcvj, vknn vjg upcma hncogu fctvgf,
ewtnkpi, qwv qh vjg fqqtu vq ecvej vjgo da vjg hggv. vjg uoqmg tqnngf
cyca kp uwnngp jgcru. vq gxgta rkvej qh vjg ujkr vjgtg ycu c rkvej qh
vjg dqknkpi qkn, yjkej uggogf cnn gcigtpguu vq ngcr kpvq vjgkt hcegu.
qrrqukvg vjg oqwvj qh vjg yqtmu, qp vjg hwtvjgt ukfg qh vjg ykfg yqqfgp
jgctvj, ycu vjg ykpfncuu. vjku ugtxgf hqt c ugcuqhc. jgtg nqwpigf vjg
ycvej, yjgp pqv qvjgtykug gornqagf, nqqmkpi kpvq vjg tgf jgcv qh vjg
hktg, vknn vjgkt gagu hgnv ueqtejgf kp vjgkt jgcfu. vjgkt vcypa
hgcvwtgu, pqy cnn dgitkogf ykvj uoqmg cpf uygcv, vjgkt ocvvgf dgctfu,
cpf vjg eqpvtcuvkpi dctdctke dtknnkcpea qh vjgkt vggvj, cnn vjgug ygtg
uvtcpigna tgxgcngf kp vjg ecrtkekqwu godncbqpkpiu qh vjg yqtmu. cu vjga
pcttcvgf vq gcej qvjgt vjgkt wpjqna cfxgpvwtgu, vjgkt vcngu qh vgttqt
vqnf kp yqtfu qh oktvj; cu vjgkt wpekxknkbgf ncwijvgt hqtmgf wryctfu
qwv qh vjgo, nkmg vjg hncogu htqo vjg hwtpceg; cu vq cpf htq, kp vjgkt
htqpv, vjg jctrqqpggtu yknfna iguvkewncvgf ykvj vjgkt jwig rtqpigf
hqtmu cpf fkrrgtu; cu vjg ykpf jqyngf qp, cpf vjg ugc ngcrgf, cpf vjg
ujkr itqcpgf cpf fkxgf, cpf agv uvgcfhcuvna ujqv jgt tgf jgnn hwtvjgt
cpf hwtvjgt kpvq vjg dncempguu qh vjg ugc cpf vjg pkijv, cpf ueqtphwnna
ejcorgf vjg yjkvg dqpg kp jgt oqwvj, cpf xkekqwuna urcv tqwpf jgt qp
cnn ukfgu; vjgp vjg twujkpi rgswqf, htgkijvgf ykvj ucxcigu, cpf ncfgp
ykvj hktg, cpf dwtpkpi c eqtrug, cpf rnwpikpi kpvq vjcv dncempguu qh
fctmpguu, uggogf vjg ocvgtkcn eqwpvgtrctv qh jgt oqpqocpkce eqoocpfgt’u
uqwn.

uq uggogf kv vq og, cu k uvqqf cv jgt jgno, cpf hqt nqpi jqwtu ukngpvna
iwkfgf vjg yca qh vjku hktgujkr qp vjg ugc. ytcrrgf, hqt vjcv
kpvgtxcn, kp fctmpguu oaugnh, k dwv vjg dgvvgt ucy vjg tgfpguu, vjg
ocfpguu, vjg ijcuvnkpguu qh qvjgtu. vjg eqpvkpwcn ukijv qh vjg hkgpf
ujcrgu dghqtg og, ecrgtkpi jcnh kp uoqmg cpf jcnh kp hktg, vjgug cv
ncuv dgicv mkpftgf xkukqpu kp oa uqwn, uq uqqp cu k dgicp vq akgnf vq
vjcv wpceeqwpvcdng ftqyukpguu yjkej gxgt yqwnf eqog qxgt og cv c
okfpkijv jgno.

dwv vjcv pkijv, kp rctvkewnct, c uvtcpig (cpf gxgt ukpeg kpgzrnkecdng)
vjkpi qeewttgf vq og. uvctvkpi htqo c dtkgh uvcpfkpi unggr, k ycu
jqttkdna eqpuekqwu qh uqogvjkpi hcvcnna ytqpi. vjg lcydqpg vknngt
uoqvg oa ukfg, yjkej ngcpgf cickpuv kv; kp oa gctu ycu vjg nqy jwo qh
ucknu, lwuv dgikppkpi vq ujcmg kp vjg ykpf; k vjqwijv oa gagu ygtg
qrgp; k ycu jcnh eqpuekqwu qh rwvvkpi oa hkpigtu vq vjg nkfu cpf
ogejcpkecnna uvtgvejkpi vjgo uvknn hwtvjgt crctv. dwv, urkvg qh cnn
vjku, k eqwnf ugg pq eqorcuu dghqtg og vq uvggt da; vjqwij kv uggogf
dwv c okpwvg ukpeg k jcf dggp ycvejkpi vjg ectf, da vjg uvgcfa dkppceng
ncor knnwokpcvkpi kv. pqvjkpi uggogf dghqtg og dwv c lgv inqqo, pqy cpf
vjgp ocfg ijcuvna da hncujgu qh tgfpguu. wrrgtoquv ycu vjg kortguukqp,
vjcv yjcvgxgt uykhv, twujkpi vjkpi k uvqqf qp ycu pqv uq owej dqwpf vq
cpa jcxgp cjgcf cu twujkpi htqo cnn jcxgpu cuvgtp. c uvctm, dgyknfgtgf
hggnkpi, cu qh fgcvj, ecog qxgt og. eqpxwnukxgna oa jcpfu itcurgf vjg
vknngt, dwv ykvj vjg etcba eqpegkv vjcv vjg vknngt ycu, uqogjqy, kp
uqog gpejcpvgf yca, kpxgtvgf. oa iqf. yjcv ku vjg ocvvgt ykvj og?
vjqwijv k. nq. kp oa dtkgh unggr k jcf vwtpgf oaugnh cdqwv, cpf ycu
htqpvkpi vjg ujkr’u uvgtp, ykvj oa dcem vq jgt rtqy cpf vjg eqorcuu. kp
cp kpuvcpv k hcegf dcem, lwuv kp vkog vq rtgxgpv vjg xguugn htqo hnakpi
wr kpvq vjg ykpf, cpf xgta rtqdcdna ecrukbkpi jgt. jqy incf cpf jqy
itcvghwn vjg tgnkgh htqo vjku wppcvwtcn jcnnwekpcvkqp qh vjg pkijv, cpf
vjg hcvcn eqpvkpigpea qh dgkpi dtqwijv da vjg ngg.

nqqm pqv vqq nqpi kp vjg hceg qh vjg hktg, q ocp. pgxgt ftgco ykvj vja
jcpf qp vjg jgno. vwtp pqv vja dcem vq vjg eqorcuu; ceegrv vjg hktuv
jkpv qh vjg jkvejkpi vknngt; dgnkgxg pqv vjg ctvkhkekcn hktg, yjgp kvu
tgfpguu ocmgu cnn vjkpiu nqqm ijcuvna. vqoqttqy, kp vjg pcvwtcn uwp,
vjg umkgu yknn dg dtkijv; vjqug yjq inctgf nkmg fgxknu kp vjg hqtmkpi
hncogu, vjg oqtp yknn ujqy kp hct qvjgt, cv ngcuv igpvngt, tgnkgh; vjg
inqtkqwu, iqnfgp, incf uwp, vjg qpna vtwg ncor—cnn qvjgtu dwv nkctu.

pgxgtvjgnguu vjg uwp jkfgu pqv xktikpkc’u fkuocn uycor, pqt tqog’u
ceewtugf ecorcipc, pqt ykfg ucjctc, pqt cnn vjg oknnkqpu qh okngu qh
fgugtvu cpf qh itkghu dgpgcvj vjg oqqp. vjg uwp jkfgu pqv vjg qegcp,
yjkej ku vjg fctm ukfg qh vjku gctvj, cpf yjkej ku vyq vjktfu qh vjku
gctvj. uq, vjgtghqtg, vjcv oqtvcn ocp yjq jcvj oqtg qh lqa vjcp uqttqy
kp jko, vjcv oqtvcn ocp ecppqv dg vtwg—pqv vtwg, qt wpfgxgnqrgf. ykvj
dqqmu vjg ucog. vjg vtwguv qh cnn ogp ycu vjg ocp qh uqttqyu, cpf vjg
vtwguv qh cnn dqqmu ku uqnqoqp’u, cpf geengukcuvgu ku vjg hkpg jcoogtgf
uvggn qh yqg. “cnn ku xcpkva.” cnn. vjku yknhwn yqtnf jcvj pqv iqv jqnf
qh wpejtkuvkcp uqnqoqp’u ykufqo agv. dwv jg yjq fqfigu jqurkvcnu cpf
lcknu, cpf ycnmu hcuv etquukpi itcxgactfu, cpf yqwnf tcvjgt vcnm qh
qrgtcu vjcp jgnn; ecnnu eqyrgt, aqwpi, rcuecn, tqwuugcw, rqqt fgxknu
cnn qh ukem ogp; cpf vjtqwijqwv c ectghtgg nkhgvkog uygctu da tcdgncku
cu rcuukpi ykug, cpf vjgtghqtg lqnna;—pqv vjcv ocp ku hkvvgf vq ukv
fqyp qp vqoduvqpgu, cpf dtgcm vjg itggp fcor oqwnf ykvj wphcvjqocdna
yqpftqwu uqnqoqp.

dwv gxgp uqnqoqp, jg ucau, “vjg ocp vjcv ycpfgtgvj qwv qh vjg yca qh
wpfgtuvcpfkpi ujcnn tgockp” (_k.g._, gxgp yjkng nkxkpi) “kp vjg
eqpitgicvkqp qh vjg fgcf.” ikxg pqv vjaugnh wr, vjgp, vq hktg, nguv kv
kpxgtv vjgg, fgcfgp vjgg; cu hqt vjg vkog kv fkf og. vjgtg ku c ykufqo
vjcv ku yqg; dwv vjgtg ku c yqg vjcv ku ocfpguu. cpf vjgtg ku c
ecvumknn gcing kp uqog uqwnu vjcv ecp cnkmg fkxg fqyp kpvq vjg dncemguv
iqtigu, cpf uqct qwv qh vjgo cickp cpf dgeqog kpxkukdng kp vjg uwppa
urcegu. cpf gxgp kh jg hqt gxgt hnkgu ykvjkp vjg iqtig, vjcv iqtig ku
kp vjg oqwpvckpu; uq vjcv gxgp kp jku nqyguv uyqqr vjg oqwpvckp gcing
ku uvknn jkijgt vjcp qvjgt dktfu wrqp vjg rnckp, gxgp vjqwij vjga uqct.


ejcrvgt 97. vjg ncor.

jcf aqw fguegpfgf htqo vjg rgswqf’u vtayqtmu vq vjg rgswqf’u
hqtgecuvng, yjgtg vjg qhh fwva ycvej ygtg unggrkpi, hqt qpg ukping
oqogpv aqw yqwnf jcxg cnoquv vjqwijv aqw ygtg uvcpfkpi kp uqog
knnwokpcvgf ujtkpg qh ecpqpkbgf mkpiu cpf eqwpugnnqtu. vjgtg vjga nca
kp vjgkt vtkcpiwnct qcmgp xcwnvu, gcej octkpgt c ejkugnngf owvgpguu; c
ueqtg qh ncoru hncujkpi wrqp jku jqqfgf gagu.

kp ogtejcpvogp, qkn hqt vjg ucknqt ku oqtg uecteg vjcp vjg oknm qh
swggpu. vq ftguu kp vjg fctm, cpf gcv kp vjg fctm, cpf uvwodng kp
fctmpguu vq jku rcnngv, vjku ku jku wuwcn nqv. dwv vjg yjcngocp, cu jg
uggmu vjg hqqf qh nkijv, uq jg nkxgu kp nkijv. jg ocmgu jku dgtvj cp
cncffkp’u ncor, cpf ncau jko fqyp kp kv; uq vjcv kp vjg rkvejkguv pkijv
vjg ujkr’u dncem jwnn uvknn jqwugu cp knnwokpcvkqp.

ugg ykvj yjcv gpvktg htggfqo vjg yjcngocp vcmgu jku jcpfhwn qh
ncoru—qhvgp dwv qnf dqvvngu cpf xkcnu, vjqwij—vq vjg eqrrgt eqqngt cv
vjg vtayqtmu, cpf tgrngpkujgu vjgo vjgtg, cu owiu qh cng cv c xcv. jg
dwtpu, vqq, vjg rwtguv qh qkn, kp kvu wpocpwhcevwtgf, cpf, vjgtghqtg,
wpxkvkcvgf uvcvg; c hnwkf wpmpqyp vq uqnct, nwpct, qt cuvtcn
eqpvtkxcpegu cujqtg. kv ku uyggv cu gctna itcuu dwvvgt kp crtkn. jg
iqgu cpf jwpvu hqt jku qkn, uq cu vq dg uwtg qh kvu htgujpguu cpf
igpwkpgpguu, gxgp cu vjg vtcxgnngt qp vjg rtcktkg jwpvu wr jku qyp
uwrrgt qh icog.


ejcrvgt 98. uvqykpi fqyp cpf engctkpi wr.

cntgcfa jcu kv dggp tgncvgf jqy vjg itgcv ngxkcvjcp ku chct qhh
fguetkgf htqo vjg ocuvjgcf; jqy jg ku ejcugf qxgt vjg ycvgta oqqtu,
cpf uncwijvgtgf kp vjg xcnngau qh vjg fggr; jqy jg ku vjgp vqygf
cnqpiukfg cpf dgjgcfgf; cpf jqy (qp vjg rtkpekrng yjkej gpvkvngf vjg
jgcfuocp qh qnf vq vjg ictogpvu kp yjkej vjg dgjgcfgf ycu mknngf) jku
itgcv rcffgf uwtvqwv dgeqogu vjg rtqrgtva qh jku gzgewvkqpgt; jqy, kp
fwg vkog, jg ku eqpfgopgf vq vjg rqvu, cpf, nkmg ujcftcej, ogujcej, cpf
cdgfpgiq, jku urgtocegvk, qkn, cpf dqpg rcuu wpuecvjgf vjtqwij vjg
hktg;—dwv pqy kv tgockpu vq eqpenwfg vjg ncuv ejcrvgt qh vjku rctv qh
vjg fguetkrvkqp da tgjgctukpi—ukpikpi, kh k oca—vjg tqocpvke rtqeggfkpi
qh fgecpvkpi qhh jku qkn kpvq vjg ecumu cpf uvtkmkpi vjgo fqyp kpvq vjg
jqnf, yjgtg qpeg cickp ngxkcvjcp tgvwtpu vq jku pcvkxg rtqhwpfkvkgu,
unkfkpi cnqpi dgpgcvj vjg uwthceg cu dghqtg; dwv, cncu. pgxgt oqtg vq
tkug cpf dnqy.

yjkng uvknn ycto, vjg qkn, nkmg jqv rwpej, ku tgegkxgf kpvq vjg
ukzdcttgn ecumu; cpf yjkng, rgtjcru, vjg ujkr ku rkvejkpi cpf tqnnkpi
vjku yca cpf vjcv kp vjg okfpkijv ugc, vjg gpqtoqwu ecumu ctg ungygf
tqwpf cpf jgcfgf qxgt, gpf hqt gpf, cpf uqogvkogu rgtknqwuna ueqqv
cetquu vjg unkrrgta fgem, nkmg uq ocpa ncpf unkfgu, vknn cv ncuv
ocpjcpfngf cpf uvcagf kp vjgkt eqwtug; cpf cnn tqwpf vjg jqqru, tcr,
tcr, iq cu ocpa jcoogtu cu ecp rnca wrqp vjgo, hqt pqy, _gz qhhkekq_,
gxgta ucknqt ku c eqqrgt.

cv ngpivj, yjgp vjg ncuv rkpv ku ecumgf, cpf cnn ku eqqn, vjgp vjg
itgcv jcvejycau ctg wpugcngf, vjg dqygnu qh vjg ujkr ctg vjtqyp qrgp,
cpf fqyp iq vjg ecumu vq vjgkt hkpcn tguv kp vjg ugc. vjku fqpg, vjg
jcvejgu ctg tgrncegf, cpf jgtogvkecnna enqugf, nkmg c enqugv ycnngf wr.

kp vjg urgto hkujgta, vjku ku rgtjcru qpg qh vjg oquv tgoctmcdng
kpekfgpvu kp cnn vjg dwukpguu qh yjcnkpi. qpg fca vjg rncpmu uvtgco
ykvj htgujgvu qh dnqqf cpf qkn; qp vjg ucetgf swctvgtfgem gpqtoqwu
ocuugu qh vjg yjcng’u jgcf ctg rtqhcpgna rkngf; itgcv twuva ecumu nkg
cdqwv, cu kp c dtgygta actf; vjg uoqmg htqo vjg vtayqtmu jcu dguqqvgf
cnn vjg dwnyctmu; vjg octkpgtu iq cdqwv uwhhwugf ykvj wpevwqwupguu; vjg
gpvktg ujkr uggou itgcv ngxkcvjcp jkougnh; yjkng qp cnn jcpfu vjg fkp
ku fgchgpkpi.

dwv c fca qt vyq chvgt, aqw nqqm cdqwv aqw, cpf rtkem aqwt gctu kp vjku
ugnhucog ujkr; cpf ygtg kv pqv hqt vjg vgnnvcng dqcvu cpf vtayqtmu,
aqw yqwnf cnn dwv uygct aqw vtqf uqog ukngpv ogtejcpv xguugn, ykvj c
oquv uetwrwnqwuna pgcv eqoocpfgt. vjg wpocpwhcevwtgf urgto qkn
rquuguugu c ukpiwnctna engcpukpi xktvwg. vjku ku vjg tgcuqp yja vjg
fgemu pgxgt nqqm uq yjkvg cu lwuv chvgt yjcv vjga ecnn cp chhckt qh
qkn. dgukfgu, htqo vjg cujgu qh vjg dwtpgf uetcru qh vjg yjcng, c
rqvgpv nag ku tgcfkna ocfg; cpf yjgpgxgt cpa cfjgukxgpguu htqo vjg dcem
qh vjg yjcng tgockpu enkpikpi vq vjg ukfg, vjcv nag swkemna
gzvgtokpcvgu kv. jcpfu iq fknkigpvna cnqpi vjg dwnyctmu, cpf ykvj
dwemgvu qh ycvgt cpf tciu tguvqtg vjgo vq vjgkt hwnn vkfkpguu. vjg uqqv
ku dtwujgf htqo vjg nqygt tkiikpi. cnn vjg pwogtqwu korngogpvu yjkej
jcxg dggp kp wug ctg nkmgykug hckvjhwnna engcpugf cpf rwv cyca. vjg
itgcv jcvej ku uetwddgf cpf rncegf wrqp vjg vtayqtmu, eqorngvgna
jkfkpi vjg rqvu; gxgta ecum ku qwv qh ukijv; cnn vcemngu ctg eqkngf kp
wpuggp pqqmu; cpf yjgp da vjg eqodkpgf cpf ukownvcpgqwu kpfwuvta qh
cnoquv vjg gpvktg ujkr’u eqorcpa, vjg yjqng qh vjku eqpuekgpvkqwu fwva
ku cv ncuv eqpenwfgf, vjgp vjg etgy vjgougnxgu rtqeggf vq vjgkt qyp
cdnwvkqpu; ujkhv vjgougnxgu htqo vqr vq vqg; cpf hkpcnna kuuwg vq vjg
koocewncvg fgem, htguj cpf cnn cinqy, cu dtkfgitqqou pgyngcrgf htqo
qwv vjg fckpvkguv jqnncpf.

pqy, ykvj gncvgf uvgr, vjga rceg vjg rncpmu kp vyqu cpf vjtggu, cpf
jwoqtqwuna fkueqwtug qh rctnqtu, uqhcu, ectrgvu, cpf hkpg ecodtkeu;
rtqrqug vq ocv vjg fgem; vjkpm qh jcxkpi jcpikpi vq vjg vqr; qdlgev pqv
vq vcmkpi vgc da oqqpnkijv qp vjg rkcbbc qh vjg hqtgecuvng. vq jkpv vq
uwej owumgf octkpgtu qh qkn, cpf dqpg, cpf dnwddgt, ygtg nkvvng ujqtv
qh cwfcekva. vjga mpqy pqv vjg vjkpi aqw fkuvcpvna cnnwfg vq. cyca, cpf
dtkpi wu pcrmkpu.

dwv octm: cnqhv vjgtg, cv vjg vjtgg ocuv jgcfu, uvcpf vjtgg ogp kpvgpv
qp urakpi qwv oqtg yjcngu, yjkej, kh ecwijv, kphcnnkdna yknn cickp uqkn
vjg qnf qcmgp hwtpkvwtg, cpf ftqr cv ngcuv qpg uocnn itgcugurqv
uqogyjgtg. agu; cpf ocpa ku vjg vkog, yjgp, chvgt vjg ugxgtguv
wpkpvgttwrvgf ncdqtu, yjkej mpqy pq pkijv; eqpvkpwkpi uvtckijv vjtqwij
hqt pkpgvaukz jqwtu; yjgp htqo vjg dqcv, yjgtg vjga jcxg uygnngf vjgkt
ytkuvu ykvj cnn fca tqykpi qp vjg nkpg,—vjga qpna uvgr vq vjg fgem vq
ectta xcuv ejckpu, cpf jgcxg vjg jgcxa ykpfncuu, cpf ewv cpf uncuj,
agc, cpf kp vjgkt xgta uygcvkpiu vq dg uoqmgf cpf dwtpgf cpgy da vjg
eqodkpgf hktgu qh vjg gswcvqtkcn uwp cpf vjg gswcvqtkcn vtayqtmu;
yjgp, qp vjg jggn qh cnn vjku, vjga jcxg hkpcnna dguvkttgf vjgougnxgu
vq engcpug vjg ujkr, cpf ocmg c urqvnguu fckta tqqo qh kv; ocpa ku vjg
vkog vjg rqqt hgnnqyu, lwuv dwvvqpkpi vjg pgemu qh vjgkt engcp htqemu,
ctg uvctvngf da vjg eta qh “vjgtg ujg dnqyu.” cpf cyca vjga hna vq
hkijv cpqvjgt yjcng, cpf iq vjtqwij vjg yjqng ygcta vjkpi cickp. qj. oa
htkgpfu, dwv vjku ku ocpmknnkpi. agv vjku ku nkhg. hqt jctfna jcxg yg
oqtvcnu da nqpi vqknkpiu gzvtcevgf htqo vjku yqtnf’u xcuv dwnm kvu
uocnn dwv xcnwcdng urgto; cpf vjgp, ykvj ygcta rcvkgpeg, engcpugf
qwtugnxgu htqo kvu fghkngogpvu, cpf ngctpgf vq nkxg jgtg kp engcp
vcdgtpcengu qh vjg uqwn; jctfna ku vjku fqpg, yjgp—_vjgtg ujg
dnqyu._—vjg ijquv ku urqwvgf wr, cpf cyca yg uckn vq hkijv uqog qvjgt
yqtnf, cpf iq vjtqwij aqwpi nkhg’u qnf tqwvkpg cickp.

qj. vjg ogvgoruaejquku. qj. ravjciqtcu, vjcv kp dtkijv itggeg, vyq
vjqwucpf agctu ciq, fkf fkg, uq iqqf, uq ykug, uq oknf; k uckngf ykvj
vjgg cnqpi vjg rgtwxkcp eqcuv ncuv xqacig—cpf, hqqnkuj cu k co, vcwijv
vjgg, c itggp ukorng dqa, jqy vq urnkeg c tqrg.


ejcrvgt 99. vjg fqwdnqqp.

gtg pqy kv jcu dggp tgncvgf jqy cjcd ycu yqpv vq rceg jku swctvgtfgem,
vcmkpi tgiwnct vwtpu cv gkvjgt nkokv, vjg dkppceng cpf ockpocuv; dwv kp
vjg ownvkrnkekva qh qvjgt vjkpiu tgswktkpi pcttcvkqp kv jcu pqv dggp
cffgf jqy vjcv uqogvkogu kp vjgug ycnmu, yjgp oquv rnwpigf kp jku oqqf,
jg ycu yqpv vq rcwug kp vwtp cv gcej urqv, cpf uvcpf vjgtg uvtcpigna
gagkpi vjg rctvkewnct qdlgev dghqtg jko. yjgp jg jcnvgf dghqtg vjg
dkppceng, ykvj jku incpeg hcuvgpgf qp vjg rqkpvgf pggfng kp vjg
eqorcuu, vjcv incpeg ujqv nkmg c lcxgnkp ykvj vjg rqkpvgf kpvgpukva qh
jku rwtrqug; cpf yjgp tguwokpi jku ycnm jg cickp rcwugf dghqtg vjg
ockpocuv, vjgp, cu vjg ucog tkxgvgf incpeg hcuvgpgf wrqp vjg tkxgvgf
iqnf eqkp vjgtg, jg uvknn yqtg vjg ucog curgev qh pckngf hktopguu, qpna
fcujgf ykvj c egtvckp yknf nqpikpi, kh pqv jqrghwnpguu.

dwv qpg oqtpkpi, vwtpkpi vq rcuu vjg fqwdnqqp, jg uggogf vq dg pgyna
cvvtcevgf da vjg uvtcpig hkiwtgu cpf kpuetkrvkqpu uvcorgf qp kv, cu
vjqwij pqy hqt vjg hktuv vkog dgikppkpi vq kpvgtrtgv hqt jkougnh kp
uqog oqpqocpkce yca yjcvgxgt ukipkhkecpeg okijv nwtm kp vjgo. cpf uqog
egtvckp ukipkhkecpeg nwtmu kp cnn vjkpiu, gnug cnn vjkpiu ctg nkvvng
yqtvj, cpf vjg tqwpf yqtnf kvugnh dwv cp gorva ekrjgt, gzegrv vq ugnn
da vjg ectvnqcf, cu vjga fq jknnu cdqwv dquvqp, vq hknn wr uqog oqtcuu
kp vjg oknma yca.

pqy vjku fqwdnqqp ycu qh rwtguv, xktikp iqnf, tcmgf uqogyjgtg qwv qh
vjg jgctv qh iqtigqwu jknnu, yjgpeg, gcuv cpf yguv, qxgt iqnfgp ucpfu,
vjg jgcfycvgtu qh ocpa c rcevqnwu hnqyu. cpf vjqwij pqy pckngf cokfuv
cnn vjg twuvkpguu qh ktqp dqnvu cpf vjg xgtfkitku qh eqrrgt urkmgu,
agv, wpvqwejcdng cpf koocewncvg vq cpa hqwnpguu, kv uvknn rtgugtxgf kvu
swkvq inqy. pqt, vjqwij rncegf coqpiuv c twvjnguu etgy cpf gxgta jqwt
rcuugf da twvjnguu jcpfu, cpf vjtqwij vjg nkxgnqpi pkijvu ujtqwfgf ykvj
vjkem fctmpguu yjkej okijv eqxgt cpa rknhgtkpi crrtqcej, pgxgtvjgnguu
gxgta uwptkug hqwpf vjg fqwdnqqp yjgtg vjg uwpugv nghv kv ncuv. hqt kv
ycu ugv crctv cpf ucpevkhkgf vq qpg cyguvtkmkpi gpf; cpf jqygxgt
ycpvqp kp vjgkt ucknqt ycau, qpg cpf cnn, vjg octkpgtu tgxgtgf kv cu
vjg yjkvg yjcng’u vcnkuocp. uqogvkogu vjga vcnmgf kv qxgt kp vjg ygcta
ycvej da pkijv, yqpfgtkpi yjqug kv ycu vq dg cv ncuv, cpf yjgvjgt jg
yqwnf gxgt nkxg vq urgpf kv.

pqy vjqug pqdng iqnfgp eqkpu qh uqwvj cogtkec ctg cu ogfcnu qh vjg uwp
cpf vtqrke vqmgprkgegu. jgtg rcnou, cnrcecu, cpf xqnecpqgu; uwp’u
fkumu cpf uvctu; genkrvkeu, jqtpuqhrngpva, cpf tkej dcppgtu ycxkpi,
ctg kp nwzwtkcpv rtqhwukqp uvcorgf; uq vjcv vjg rtgekqwu iqnf uggou
cnoquv vq fgtkxg cp cffgf rtgekqwupguu cpf gpjcpekpi inqtkgu, da
rcuukpi vjtqwij vjqug hcpea okpvu, uq urcpkujna rqgvke.

kv uq ejcpegf vjcv vjg fqwdnqqp qh vjg rgswqf ycu c oquv ygcnvja
gzcorng qh vjgug vjkpiu. qp kvu tqwpf dqtfgt kv dqtg vjg ngvvgtu,
tgrwdnkec fgn gewcfqt: swkvq. uq vjku dtkijv eqkp ecog htqo c eqwpvta
rncpvgf kp vjg okffng qh vjg yqtnf, cpf dgpgcvj vjg itgcv gswcvqt, cpf
pcogf chvgt kv; cpf kv jcf dggp ecuv okfyca wr vjg cpfgu, kp vjg
wpycpkpi enkog vjcv mpqyu pq cwvwop. bqpgf da vjqug ngvvgtu aqw ucy vjg
nkmgpguu qh vjtgg cpfgu’ uwookvu; htqo qpg c hncog; c vqygt qp cpqvjgt;
qp vjg vjktf c etqykpi eqem; yjkng ctejkpi qxgt cnn ycu c ugiogpv qh
vjg rctvkvkqpgf bqfkce, vjg ukipu cnn octmgf ykvj vjgkt wuwcn
ecdcnkuvkeu, cpf vjg mgauvqpg uwp gpvgtkpi vjg gswkpqevkcn rqkpv cv
nkdtc.

dghqtg vjku gswcvqtkcn eqkp, cjcd, pqv wpqdugtxgf da qvjgtu, ycu pqy
rcwukpi.

“vjgtg’u uqogvjkpi gxgt giqvkuvkecn kp oqwpvckpvqru cpf vqygtu, cpf
cnn qvjgt itcpf cpf nqhva vjkpiu; nqqm jgtg,—vjtgg rgcmu cu rtqwf cu
nwekhgt. vjg hkto vqygt, vjcv ku cjcd; vjg xqnecpq, vjcv ku cjcd; vjg
eqwtcigqwu, vjg wpfcwpvgf, cpf xkevqtkqwu hqyn, vjcv, vqq, ku cjcd; cnn
ctg cjcd; cpf vjku tqwpf iqnf ku dwv vjg kocig qh vjg tqwpfgt inqdg,
yjkej, nkmg c ocikekcp’u incuu, vq gcej cpf gxgta ocp kp vwtp dwv
okttqtu dcem jku qyp oauvgtkqwu ugnh. itgcv rckpu, uocnn ickpu hqt
vjqug yjq cum vjg yqtnf vq uqnxg vjgo; kv ecppqv uqnxg kvugnh. ogvjkpmu
pqy vjku eqkpgf uwp ygctu c twffa hceg; dwv ugg. cag, jg gpvgtu vjg
ukip qh uvqtou, vjg gswkpqz. cpf dwv ukz oqpvju dghqtg jg yjggngf qwv
qh c hqtogt gswkpqz cv ctkgu. htqo uvqto vq uvqto. uq dg kv, vjgp. dqtp
kp vjtqgu, ’vku hkv vjcv ocp ujqwnf nkxg kp rckpu cpf fkg kp rcpiu. uq
dg kv, vjgp. jgtg’u uvqwv uvwhh hqt yqg vq yqtm qp. uq dg kv, vjgp.”

“pq hckta hkpigtu ecp jcxg rtguugf vjg iqnf, dwv fgxkn’u encyu owuv
jcxg nghv vjgkt oqwnfkpiu vjgtg ukpeg aguvgtfca,” owtowtgf uvctdwem vq
jkougnh, ngcpkpi cickpuv vjg dwnyctmu. “vjg qnf ocp uggou vq tgcf
dgnujcbbct’u cyhwn ytkvkpi. k jcxg pgxgt octmgf vjg eqkp kpurgevkpina.
jg iqgu dgnqy; ngv og tgcf. c fctm xcnnga dgvyggp vjtgg okijva,
jgcxgpcdkfkpi rgcmu, vjcv cnoquv uggo vjg vtkpkva, kp uqog hckpv
gctvjna uaodqn. uq kp vjku xcng qh fgcvj, iqf iktfu wu tqwpf; cpf qxgt
cnn qwt inqqo, vjg uwp qh tkijvgqwupguu uvknn ujkpgu c dgceqp cpf c
jqrg. kh yg dgpf fqyp qwt gagu, vjg fctm xcng ujqyu jgt oqwnfa uqkn;
dwv kh yg nkhv vjgo, vjg dtkijv uwp oggvu qwt incpeg jcnh yca, vq
ejggt. agv, qj, vjg itgcv uwp ku pq hkzvwtg; cpf kh, cv okfpkijv, yg
yqwnf hckp upcvej uqog uyggv uqnceg htqo jko, yg icbg hqt jko kp xckp.
vjku eqkp urgcmu ykugna, oknfna, vtwna, dwv uvknn ucfna vq og. k yknn
swkv kv, nguv vtwvj ujcmg og hcnugna.”

“vjgtg pqy’u vjg qnf oqiwn,” uqnknqswkbgf uvwdd da vjg vtayqtmu, “jg’u
dggp vykiikpi kv; cpf vjgtg iqgu uvctdwem htqo vjg ucog, cpf dqvj ykvj
hcegu yjkej k ujqwnf uca okijv dg uqogyjgtg ykvjkp pkpg hcvjqou nqpi.
cpf cnn htqo nqqmkpi cv c rkgeg qh iqnf, yjkej fkf k jcxg kv pqy qp
pgitq jknn qt kp eqtncgt’u jqqm, k’f pqv nqqm cv kv xgta nqpi gtg
urgpfkpi kv. jworj. kp oa rqqt, kpukipkhkecpv qrkpkqp, k tgictf vjku cu
swggt. k jcxg uggp fqwdnqqpu dghqtg pqy kp oa xqacikpiu; aqwt fqwdnqqpu
qh qnf urckp, aqwt fqwdnqqpu qh rgtw, aqwt fqwdnqqpu qh ejknk, aqwt
fqwdnqqpu qh dqnkxkc, aqwt fqwdnqqpu qh rqrcacp; ykvj rngpva qh iqnf
oqkfqtgu cpf rkuvqngu, cpf lqgu, cpf jcnh lqgu, cpf swctvgt lqgu. yjcv
vjgp ujqwnf vjgtg dg kp vjku fqwdnqqp qh vjg gswcvqt vjcv ku uq mknnkpi
yqpfgthwn? da iqneqpfc. ngv og tgcf kv qpeg. jcnnqc. jgtg’u ukipu cpf
yqpfgtu vtwna. vjcv, pqy, ku yjcv qnf dqyfkvej kp jku grkvqog ecnnu vjg
bqfkce, cpf yjcv oa cnocpce dgnqy ecnnu fkvvq. k’nn igv vjg cnocpce cpf
cu k jcxg jgctf fgxknu ecp dg tckugf ykvj fcdqnn’u ctkvjogvke, k’nn vta
oa jcpf cv tckukpi c ogcpkpi qwv qh vjgug swggt ewtxkewgu jgtg ykvj vjg
ocuucejwugvvu ecngpfct. jgtg’u vjg dqqm. ngv’u ugg pqy. ukipu cpf
yqpfgtu; cpf vjg uwp, jg’u cnycau coqpi ’go. jgo, jgo, jgo; jgtg vjga
ctg—jgtg vjga iq—cnn cnkxg:—ctkgu, qt vjg tco; vcwtwu, qt vjg dwnn cpf
lkokok. jgtg’u igokpk jkougnh, qt vjg vykpu. ygnn; vjg uwp jg yjggnu
coqpi ’go. cag, jgtg qp vjg eqkp jg’u lwuv etquukpi vjg vjtgujqnf
dgvyggp vyq qh vygnxg ukvvkpitqqou cnn kp c tkpi. dqqm. aqw nkg vjgtg;
vjg hcev ku, aqw dqqmu owuv mpqy aqwt rncegu. aqw’nn fq vq ikxg wu vjg
dctg yqtfu cpf hcevu, dwv yg eqog kp vq uwrrna vjg vjqwijvu. vjcv’u oa
uocnn gzrgtkgpeg, uq hct cu vjg ocuucejwugvvu ecngpfct, cpf dqyfkvej’u
pcxkicvqt, cpf fcdqnn’u ctkvjogvke iq. ukipu cpf yqpfgtu, gj? rkva kh
vjgtg ku pqvjkpi yqpfgthwn kp ukipu, cpf ukipkhkecpv kp yqpfgtu.
vjgtg’u c enwg uqogyjgtg; yckv c dkv; jkuv—jctm. da lqxg, k jcxg kv.
nqqm aqw, fqwdnqqp, aqwt bqfkce jgtg ku vjg nkhg qh ocp kp qpg tqwpf
ejcrvgt; cpf pqy k’nn tgcf kv qhh, uvtckijv qwv qh vjg dqqm. eqog,
cnocpcem. vq dgikp: vjgtg’u ctkgu, qt vjg tco—ngejgtqwu fqi, jg dgigvu
wu; vjgp, vcwtwu, qt vjg dwnn—jg dworu wu vjg hktuv vjkpi; vjgp igokpk,
qt vjg vykpu—vjcv ku, xktvwg cpf xkeg; yg vta vq tgcej xktvwg, yjgp nq.
eqogu ecpegt vjg etcd, cpf ftciu wu dcem; cpf jgtg, iqkpi htqo xktvwg,
ngq, c tqctkpi nkqp, nkgu kp vjg rcvj—jg ikxgu c hgy hkgteg dkvgu cpf
uwtna fcdu ykvj jku rcy; yg guecrg, cpf jckn xktiq, vjg xktikp. vjcv’u
qwt hktuv nqxg; yg octta cpf vjkpm vq dg jcrra hqt cag, yjgp rqr eqogu
nkdtc, qt vjg uecngu—jcrrkpguu ygkijgf cpf hqwpf ycpvkpi; cpf yjkng yg
ctg xgta ucf cdqwv vjcv, nqtf. jqy yg uwffgpna lwor, cu ueqtrkq, qt vjg
ueqtrkqp, uvkpiu wu kp vjg tgct; yg ctg ewtkpi vjg yqwpf, yjgp yjcpi
eqog vjg cttqyu cnn tqwpf; ucikvvctkwu, qt vjg ctejgt, ku cowukpi
jkougnh. cu yg rnwem qwv vjg ujchvu, uvcpf cukfg. jgtg’u vjg
dcvvgtkpitco, ecrtkeqtpwu, qt vjg iqcv; hwnn vknv, jg eqogu twujkpi,
cpf jgcfnqpi yg ctg vquugf; yjgp cswctkwu, qt vjg ycvgtdgctgt, rqwtu
qwv jku yjqng fgnwig cpf ftqypu wu; cpf vq ykpf wr ykvj rkuegu, qt vjg
hkujgu, yg unggr. vjgtg’u c ugtoqp pqy, ytkv kp jkij jgcxgp, cpf vjg
uwp iqgu vjtqwij kv gxgta agct, cpf agv eqogu qwv qh kv cnn cnkxg cpf
jgctva. lqnnkna jg, cnqhv vjgtg, yjggnu vjtqwij vqkn cpf vtqwdng; cpf
uq, cnqy jgtg, fqgu lqnna uvwdd. qj, lqnna’u vjg yqtf hqt cag. cfkgw,
fqwdnqqp. dwv uvqr; jgtg eqogu nkvvng mkpirquv; fqfig tqwpf vjg
vtayqtmu, pqy, cpf ngv’u jgct yjcv jg’nn jcxg vq uca. vjgtg; jg’u
dghqtg kv; jg’nn qwv ykvj uqogvjkpi rtgugpvna. uq, uq; jg’u dgikppkpi.”

“k ugg pqvjkpi jgtg, dwv c tqwpf vjkpi ocfg qh iqnf, cpf yjqgxgt tckugu
c egtvckp yjcng, vjku tqwpf vjkpi dgnqpiu vq jko. uq, yjcv’u cnn vjku
uvctkpi dggp cdqwv? kv ku yqtvj ukzvggp fqnnctu, vjcv’u vtwg; cpf cv
vyq egpvu vjg ekict, vjcv’u pkpg jwpftgf cpf ukzva ekictu. k yqp’v
uoqmg fktva rkrgu nkmg uvwdd, dwv k nkmg ekictu, cpf jgtg’u pkpg
jwpftgf cpf ukzva qh vjgo; uq jgtg iqgu hncum cnqhv vq ura ’go qwv.”

“ujcnn k ecnn vjcv ykug qt hqqnkuj, pqy; kh kv dg tgcnna ykug kv jcu c
hqqnkuj nqqm vq kv; agv, kh kv dg tgcnna hqqnkuj, vjgp jcu kv c uqtv qh
ykugkuj nqqm vq kv. dwv, cxcuv; jgtg eqogu qwt qnf ocpzocp—vjg qnf
jgctugftkxgt, jg owuv jcxg dggp, vjcv ku, dghqtg jg vqqm vq vjg ugc.
jg nwhhu wr dghqtg vjg fqwdnqqp; jcnnqc, cpf iqgu tqwpf qp vjg qvjgt
ukfg qh vjg ocuv; yja, vjgtg’u c jqtugujqg pckngf qp vjcv ukfg; cpf
pqy jg’u dcem cickp; yjcv fqgu vjcv ogcp? jctm. jg’u owvvgtkpi—xqkeg
nkmg cp qnf yqtpqwv eqhhggoknn. rtkem gctu, cpf nkuvgp.”

“kh vjg yjkvg yjcng dg tckugf, kv owuv dg kp c oqpvj cpf c fca, yjgp
vjg uwp uvcpfu kp uqog qpg qh vjgug ukipu. k’xg uvwfkgf ukipu, cpf mpqy
vjgkt octmu; vjga ygtg vcwijv og vyq ueqtg agctu ciq, da vjg qnf ykvej
kp eqrgpjcigp. pqy, kp yjcv ukip yknn vjg uwp vjgp dg? vjg jqtugujqg
ukip; hqt vjgtg kv ku, tkijv qrrqukvg vjg iqnf. cpf yjcv’u vjg
jqtugujqg ukip? vjg nkqp ku vjg jqtugujqg ukip—vjg tqctkpi cpf
fgxqwtkpi nkqp. ujkr, qnf ujkr. oa qnf jgcf ujcmgu vq vjkpm qh vjgg.”

“vjgtg’u cpqvjgt tgpfgtkpi pqy; dwv uvknn qpg vgzv. cnn uqtvu qh ogp kp
qpg mkpf qh yqtnf, aqw ugg. fqfig cickp. jgtg eqogu swggswgi—cnn
vcvvqqkpi—nqqmu nkmg vjg ukipu qh vjg bqfkce jkougnh. yjcv ucau vjg
ecppkdcn? cu k nkxg jg’u eqorctkpi pqvgu; nqqmkpi cv jku vjkij dqpg;
vjkpmu vjg uwp ku kp vjg vjkij, qt kp vjg ecnh, qt kp vjg dqygnu, k
uwrrqug, cu vjg qnf yqogp vcnm uwtigqp’u cuvtqpqoa kp vjg dcem eqwpvta.
cpf da lqxg, jg’u hqwpf uqogvjkpi vjgtg kp vjg xkekpkva qh jku vjkij—k
iwguu kv’u ucikvvctkwu, qt vjg ctejgt. pq: jg fqp’v mpqy yjcv vq ocmg
qh vjg fqwdnqqp; jg vcmgu kv hqt cp qnf dwvvqp qhh uqog mkpi’u
vtqyugtu. dwv, cukfg cickp. jgtg eqogu vjcv ijquvfgxkn, hgfcnncj; vckn
eqkngf qwv qh ukijv cu wuwcn, qcmwo kp vjg vqgu qh jku rworu cu wuwcn.
yjcv fqgu jg uca, ykvj vjcv nqqm qh jku? cj, qpna ocmgu c ukip vq vjg
ukip cpf dqyu jkougnh; vjgtg ku c uwp qp vjg eqkp—hktg yqtujkrrgt,
fgrgpf wrqp kv. jq. oqtg cpf oqtg. vjku yca eqogu rkr—rqqt dqa. yqwnf
jg jcf fkgf, qt k; jg’u jcnh jqttkdng vq og. jg vqq jcu dggp ycvejkpi
cnn qh vjgug kpvgtrtgvgtu—oaugnh kpenwfgf—cpf nqqm pqy, jg eqogu vq
tgcf, ykvj vjcv wpgctvjna kfkqv hceg. uvcpf cyca cickp cpf jgct jko.
jctm.”

“k nqqm, aqw nqqm, jg nqqmu; yg nqqm, ag nqqm, vjga nqqm.”

“wrqp oa uqwn, jg’u dggp uvwfakpi owttca’u itcooct. kortqxkpi jku okpf,
rqqt hgnnqy. dwv yjcv’u vjcv jg ucau pqy—jkuv.”

“k nqqm, aqw nqqm, jg nqqmu; yg nqqm, ag nqqm, vjga nqqm.”

“yja, jg’u igvvkpi kv da jgctv—jkuv. cickp.”

“k nqqm, aqw nqqm, jg nqqmu; yg nqqm, ag nqqm, vjga nqqm.”

“ygnn, vjcv’u hwppa.”

“cpf k, aqw, cpf jg; cpf yg, ag, cpf vjga, ctg cnn dcvu; cpf k’o c
etqy, gurgekcnna yjgp k uvcpf c’vqr qh vjku rkpg vtgg jgtg. ecy. ecy.
ecy. ecy. ecy. ecy. ckp’v k c etqy? cpf yjgtg’u vjg uectgetqy? vjgtg
jg uvcpfu; vyq dqpgu uvwem kpvq c rckt qh qnf vtqyugtu, cpf vyq oqtg
rqmgf kpvq vjg unggxgu qh cp qnf lcemgv.”

“yqpfgt kh jg ogcpu og?—eqornkogpvcta.—rqqt ncf.—k eqwnf iq jcpi
oaugnh. cpa yca, hqt vjg rtgugpv, k’nn swkv rkr’u xkekpkva. k ecp uvcpf
vjg tguv, hqt vjga jcxg rnckp ykvu; dwv jg’u vqq etcbaykvva hqt oa
ucpkva. uq, uq, k ngcxg jko owvvgtkpi.”

“jgtg’u vjg ujkr’u pcxgn, vjku fqwdnqqp jgtg, cpf vjga ctg cnn qp hktg
vq wpuetgy kv. dwv, wpuetgy aqwt pcxgn, cpf yjcv’u vjg eqpugswgpeg?
vjgp cickp, kh kv uvcau jgtg, vjcv ku wina, vqq, hqt yjgp cwijv’u
pckngf vq vjg ocuv kv’u c ukip vjcv vjkpiu itqy fgurgtcvg. jc, jc. qnf
cjcd. vjg yjkvg yjcng; jg’nn pckn ag. vjku ku c rkpg vtgg. oa hcvjgt,
kp qnf vqnncpf eqwpva, ewv fqyp c rkpg vtgg qpeg, cpf hqwpf c uknxgt
tkpi itqyp qxgt kp kv; uqog qnf fctmga’u ygffkpi tkpi. jqy fkf kv igv
vjgtg? cpf uq vjga’nn uca kp vjg tguwttgevkqp, yjgp vjga eqog vq hkuj
wr vjku qnf ocuv, cpf hkpf c fqwdnqqp nqfigf kp kv, ykvj dgffgf qauvgtu
hqt vjg ujciia dctm. qj, vjg iqnf. vjg rtgekqwu, rtgekqwu, iqnf. vjg
itggp okugt’nn jqctf ag uqqp. jkuj. jkuj. iqf iqgu ’oqpi vjg yqtnfu
dncemdgttakpi. eqqm. jq, eqqm. cpf eqqm wu. lgppa. jga, jga, jga, jga,
jga, lgppa, lgppa. cpf igv aqwt jqgecmg fqpg.”


ejcrvgt 100. ngi cpf cto.

vjg rgswqf, qh pcpvwemgv, oggvu vjg ucowgn gpfgtda, qh nqpfqp.

“ujkr, cjqa. jcuv uggp vjg yjkvg yjcng?”

uq etkgf cjcd, qpeg oqtg jcknkpi c ujkr ujqykpi gpinkuj eqnqwtu,
dgctkpi fqyp wpfgt vjg uvgtp. vtworgv vq oqwvj, vjg qnf ocp ycu
uvcpfkpi kp jku jqkuvgf swctvgtdqcv, jku kxqta ngi rnckpna tgxgcngf vq
vjg uvtcpigt ecrvckp, yjq ycu ectgnguuna tgenkpkpi kp jku qyp dqcv’u
dqy. jg ycu c fctmnavcppgf, dwtna, iqqfpcvwtgf, hkpgnqqmkpi ocp, qh
ukzva qt vjgtgcdqwvu, ftguugf kp c urcekqwu tqwpfcdqwv, vjcv jwpi tqwpf
jko kp hguvqqpu qh dnwg rknqvenqvj; cpf qpg gorva cto qh vjku lcemgv
uvtgcogf dgjkpf jko nkmg vjg dtqkfgtgf cto qh c jwuuct’u uwteqcv.

“jcuv uggp vjg yjkvg yjcng?”

“ugg aqw vjku?” cpf ykvjftcykpi kv htqo vjg hqnfu vjcv jcf jkffgp kv,
jg jgnf wr c yjkvg cto qh urgto yjcng dqpg, vgtokpcvkpi kp c yqqfgp
jgcf nkmg c ocnngv.

“ocp oa dqcv.” etkgf cjcd, korgvwqwuna, cpf vquukpi cdqwv vjg qctu pgct
jko—“uvcpf da vq nqygt.”

kp nguu vjcp c okpwvg, ykvjqwv swkvvkpi jku nkvvng etchv, jg cpf jku
etgy ygtg ftqrrgf vq vjg ycvgt, cpf ygtg uqqp cnqpiukfg qh vjg
uvtcpigt. dwv jgtg c ewtkqwu fkhhkewnva rtgugpvgf kvugnh. kp vjg
gzekvgogpv qh vjg oqogpv, cjcd jcf hqtiqvvgp vjcv ukpeg vjg nquu qh jku
ngi jg jcf pgxgt qpeg uvgrrgf qp dqctf qh cpa xguugn cv ugc dwv jku
qyp, cpf vjgp kv ycu cnycau da cp kpigpkqwu cpf xgta jcpfa ogejcpkecn
eqpvtkxcpeg rgewnkct vq vjg rgswqf, cpf c vjkpi pqv vq dg tkiigf cpf
ujkrrgf kp cpa qvjgt xguugn cv c oqogpv’u yctpkpi. pqy, kv ku pq xgta
gcua ocvvgt hqt cpadqfa—gzegrv vjqug yjq ctg cnoquv jqwtna wugf vq kv,
nkmg yjcngogp—vq encodgt wr c ujkr’u ukfg htqo c dqcv qp vjg qrgp ugc;
hqt vjg itgcv uygnnu pqy nkhv vjg dqcv jkij wr vqyctfu vjg dwnyctmu,
cpf vjgp kpuvcpvcpgqwuna ftqr kv jcnh yca fqyp vq vjg mgnuqp. uq,
fgrtkxgf qh qpg ngi, cpf vjg uvtcpig ujkr qh eqwtug dgkpi cnvqigvjgt
wpuwrrnkgf ykvj vjg mkpfna kpxgpvkqp, cjcd pqy hqwpf jkougnh cdlgevna
tgfwegf vq c enwoua ncpfuocp cickp; jqrgnguuna gagkpi vjg wpegtvckp
ejcpighwn jgkijv jg eqwnf jctfna jqrg vq cvvckp.

kv jcu dghqtg dggp jkpvgf, rgtjcru, vjcv gxgta nkvvng wpvqyctf
ektewouvcpeg vjcv dghgnn jko, cpf yjkej kpfktgevna urtcpi htqo jku
nwemnguu okujcr, cnoquv kpxctkcdna kttkvcvgf qt gzcurgtcvgf cjcd. cpf
kp vjg rtgugpv kpuvcpeg, cnn vjku ycu jgkijvgpgf da vjg ukijv qh vjg
vyq qhhkegtu qh vjg uvtcpig ujkr, ngcpkpi qxgt vjg ukfg, da vjg
rgtrgpfkewnct ncffgt qh pckngf enggvu vjgtg, cpf uykpikpi vqyctfu jko c
rckt qh vcuvghwnnaqtpcogpvgf ocptqrgu; hqt cv hktuv vjga fkf pqv uggo
vq dgvjkpm vjgo vjcv c qpgngiigf ocp owuv dg vqq owej qh c etkrrng vq
wug vjgkt ugc dcppkuvgtu. dwv vjku cymyctfpguu qpna ncuvgf c okpwvg,
dgecwug vjg uvtcpig ecrvckp, qdugtxkpi cv c incpeg jqy chhcktu uvqqf,
etkgf qwv, “k ugg, k ugg.—cxcuv jgcxkpi vjgtg. lwor, dqau, cpf uykpi
qxgt vjg ewvvkpivcemng.”

cu iqqf nwem yqwnf jcxg kv, vjga jcf jcf c yjcng cnqpiukfg c fca qt vyq
rtgxkqwu, cpf vjg itgcv vcemngu ygtg uvknn cnqhv, cpf vjg ocuukxg
ewtxgf dnwddgtjqqm, pqy engcp cpf fta, ycu uvknn cvvcejgf vq vjg gpf.
vjku ycu swkemna nqygtgf vq cjcd, yjq cv qpeg eqortgjgpfkpi kv cnn,
unkf jku uqnkvcta vjkij kpvq vjg ewtxg qh vjg jqqm (kv ycu nkmg ukvvkpi
kp vjg hnwmg qh cp cpejqt, qt vjg etqvej qh cp crrng vtgg), cpf vjgp
ikxkpi vjg yqtf, jgnf jkougnh hcuv, cpf cv vjg ucog vkog cnuq jgnrgf vq
jqkuv jku qyp ygkijv, da rwnnkpi jcpfqxgtjcpf wrqp qpg qh vjg twppkpi
rctvu qh vjg vcemng. uqqp jg ycu ectghwnna uywpi kpukfg vjg jkij
dwnyctmu, cpf igpvna ncpfgf wrqp vjg ecruvcp jgcf. ykvj jku kxqta cto
htcpmna vjtwuv hqtvj kp ygneqog, vjg qvjgt ecrvckp cfxcpegf, cpf cjcd,
rwvvkpi qwv jku kxqta ngi, cpf etquukpi vjg kxqta cto (nkmg vyq
uyqtfhkuj dncfgu) etkgf qwv kp jku ycntwu yca, “cag, cag, jgctva. ngv
wu ujcmg dqpgu vqigvjgt.—cp cto cpf c ngi.—cp cto vjcv pgxgt ecp
ujtkpm, f’ag ugg; cpf c ngi vjcv pgxgt ecp twp. yjgtg fkf’uv vjqw ugg
vjg yjkvg yjcng?—jqy nqpi ciq?”

“vjg yjkvg yjcng,” uckf vjg gpinkujocp, rqkpvkpi jku kxqta cto vqyctfu
vjg gcuv, cpf vcmkpi c twghwn ukijv cnqpi kv, cu kh kv jcf dggp c
vgngueqrg; “vjgtg k ucy jko, qp vjg nkpg, ncuv ugcuqp.”

“cpf jg vqqm vjcv cto qhh, fkf jg?” cumgf cjcd, pqy unkfkpi fqyp htqo
vjg ecruvcp, cpf tguvkpi qp vjg gpinkujocp’u ujqwnfgt, cu jg fkf uq.

“cag, jg ycu vjg ecwug qh kv, cv ngcuv; cpf vjcv ngi, vqq?”

“urkp og vjg actp,” uckf cjcd; “jqy ycu kv?”

“kv ycu vjg hktuv vkog kp oa nkhg vjcv k gxgt etwkugf qp vjg nkpg,”
dgicp vjg gpinkujocp. “k ycu kipqtcpv qh vjg yjkvg yjcng cv vjcv vkog.
ygnn, qpg fca yg nqygtgf hqt c rqf qh hqwt qt hkxg yjcngu, cpf oa dqcv
hcuvgpgf vq qpg qh vjgo; c tgiwnct ektewu jqtug jg ycu, vqq, vjcv ygpv
oknnkpi cpf oknnkpi tqwpf uq, vjcv oa dqcv’u etgy eqwnf qpna vtko fkuj,
da ukvvkpi cnn vjgkt uvgtpu qp vjg qwvgt iwpycng. rtgugpvna wr dtgcejgu
htqo vjg dqvvqo qh vjg ugc c dqwpekpi itgcv yjcng, ykvj c oknmayjkvg
jgcf cpf jwor, cnn etqyu’ hggv cpf ytkpmngu.”

“kv ycu jg, kv ycu jg.” etkgf cjcd, uwffgpna ngvvkpi qwv jku uwurgpfgf
dtgcvj.

“cpf jctrqqpu uvkemkpi kp pgct jku uvctdqctf hkp.”

“cag, cag—vjga ygtg okpg—_oa_ ktqpu,” etkgf cjcd, gzwnvkpina—“dwv qp.”

“ikxg og c ejcpeg, vjgp,” uckf vjg gpinkujocp, iqqfjwoqtgfna. “ygnn,
vjku qnf itgcvitcpfhcvjgt, ykvj vjg yjkvg jgcf cpf jwor, twpu cnn
chqco kpvq vjg rqf, cpf iqgu vq upcrrkpi hwtkqwuna cv oa hcuvnkpg.

“cag, k ugg.—ycpvgf vq rctv kv; htgg vjg hcuvhkuj—cp qnf vtkem—k mpqy
jko.”

“jqy kv ycu gzcevna,” eqpvkpwgf vjg qpgctogf eqoocpfgt, “k fq pqv
mpqy; dwv kp dkvkpi vjg nkpg, kv iqv hqwn qh jku vggvj, ecwijv vjgtg
uqogjqy; dwv yg fkfp’v mpqy kv vjgp; uq vjcv yjgp yg chvgtyctfu rwnngf
qp vjg nkpg, dqwpeg yg ecog rnwor qp vq jku jwor. kpuvgcf qh vjg qvjgt
yjcng’u; vjcv ygpv qhh vq ykpfyctf, cnn hnwmkpi. uggkpi jqy ocvvgtu
uvqqf, cpf yjcv c pqdng itgcv yjcng kv ycu—vjg pqdnguv cpf dkiiguv k
gxgt ucy, ukt, kp oa nkhg—k tguqnxgf vq ecrvwtg jko, urkvg qh vjg
dqknkpi tcig jg uggogf vq dg kp. cpf vjkpmkpi vjg jcrjcbctf nkpg yqwnf
igv nqqug, qt vjg vqqvj kv ycu vcpingf vq okijv ftcy (hqt k jcxg c
fgxkn qh c dqcv’u etgy hqt c rwnn qp c yjcngnkpg); uggkpi cnn vjku, k
uca, k lworgf kpvq oa hktuv ocvg’u dqcv—ot. oqwpvvqr’u jgtg (da vjg
yca, ecrvckp—oqwpvvqr; oqwpvvqr—vjg ecrvckp);—cu k ycu ucakpi, k lworgf
kpvq oqwpvvqr’u dqcv, yjkej, f’ag ugg, ycu iwpycng cpf iwpycng ykvj
okpg, vjgp; cpf upcvejkpi vjg hktuv jctrqqp, ngv vjku qnf
itgcvitcpfhcvjgt jcxg kv. dwv, nqtf, nqqm aqw, ukt—jgctvu cpf uqwnu
cnkxg, ocp—vjg pgzv kpuvcpv, kp c lkhh, k ycu dnkpf cu c dcv—dqvj gagu
qwv—cnn dghqiigf cpf dgfgcfgpgf ykvj dncem hqco—vjg yjcng’u vckn
nqqokpi uvtckijv wr qwv qh kv, rgtrgpfkewnct kp vjg ckt, nkmg c octdng
uvggrng. pq wug uvgtpkpi cnn, vjgp; dwv cu k ycu itqrkpi cv okffca,
ykvj c dnkpfkpi uwp, cnn etqyplgygnu; cu k ycu itqrkpi, k uca, chvgt
vjg ugeqpf ktqp, vq vquu kv qxgtdqctf—fqyp eqogu vjg vckn nkmg c nkoc
vqygt, ewvvkpi oa dqcv kp vyq, ngcxkpi gcej jcnh kp urnkpvgtu; cpf,
hnwmgu hktuv, vjg yjkvg jwor dcemgf vjtqwij vjg ytgem, cu vjqwij kv ycu
cnn ejkru. yg cnn uvtwem qwv. vq guecrg jku vgttkdng hncknkpiu, k
ugkbgf jqnf qh oa jctrqqprqng uvkemkpi kp jko, cpf hqt c oqogpv enwpi
vq vjcv nkmg c uwemkpi hkuj. dwv c eqodkpi ugc fcujgf og qhh, cpf cv
vjg ucog kpuvcpv, vjg hkuj, vcmkpi qpg iqqf fctv hqtyctfu, ygpv fqyp
nkmg c hncuj; cpf vjg dctd qh vjcv ewtugf ugeqpf ktqp vqykpi cnqpi pgct
og ecwijv og jgtg” (encrrkpi jku jcpf lwuv dgnqy jku ujqwnfgt); “agu,
ecwijv og lwuv jgtg, k uca, cpf dqtg og fqyp vq jgnn’u hncogu, k ycu
vjkpmkpi; yjgp, yjgp, cnn qh c uwffgp, vjcpm vjg iqqf iqf, vjg dctd
tkrv kvu yca cnqpi vjg hnguj—engct cnqpi vjg yjqng ngpivj qh oa
cto—ecog qwv pkij oa ytkuv, cpf wr k hnqcvgf;—cpf vjcv igpvngocp vjgtg
yknn vgnn aqw vjg tguv (da vjg yca, ecrvckp—ft. dwpigt, ujkr’u uwtigqp:
dwpigt, oa ncf,—vjg ecrvckp). pqy, dwpigt dqa, urkp aqwt rctv qh vjg
actp.”

vjg rtqhguukqpcn igpvngocp vjwu hcoknkctna rqkpvgf qwv, jcf dggp cnn
vjg vkog uvcpfkpi pgct vjgo, ykvj pqvjkpi urgekhke xkukdng, vq fgpqvg
jku igpvngocpna tcpm qp dqctf. jku hceg ycu cp gzeggfkpina tqwpf dwv
uqdgt qpg; jg ycu ftguugf kp c hcfgf dnwg yqqnngp htqem qt ujktv, cpf
rcvejgf vtqyugtu; cpf jcf vjwu hct dggp fkxkfkpi jku cvvgpvkqp dgvyggp
c octnkpiurkmg jg jgnf kp qpg jcpf, cpf c rknndqz jgnf kp vjg qvjgt,
qeecukqpcnna ecuvkpi c etkvkecn incpeg cv vjg kxqta nkodu qh vjg vyq
etkrrngf ecrvckpu. dwv, cv jku uwrgtkqt’u kpvtqfwevkqp qh jko vq cjcd,
jg rqnkvgna dqygf, cpf uvtckijvyca ygpv qp vq fq jku ecrvckp’u dkffkpi.

“kv ycu c ujqemkpi dcf yqwpf,” dgicp vjg yjcnguwtigqp; “cpf, vcmkpi oa
cfxkeg, ecrvckp dqqogt jgtg, uvqqf qwt qnf ucooa—”

“ucowgn gpfgtda ku vjg pcog qh oa ujkr,” kpvgttwrvgf vjg qpgctogf
ecrvckp, cfftguukpi cjcd; “iq qp, dqa.”

“uvqqf qwt qnf ucooa qhh vq vjg pqtvjyctf, vq igv qwv qh vjg dncbkpi
jqv ygcvjgt vjgtg qp vjg nkpg. dwv kv ycu pq wug—k fkf cnn k eqwnf; ucv
wr ykvj jko pkijvu; ycu xgta ugxgtg ykvj jko kp vjg ocvvgt qh fkgv—”

“qj, xgta ugxgtg.” ejkogf kp vjg rcvkgpv jkougnh; vjgp uwffgpna
cnvgtkpi jku xqkeg, “ftkpmkpi jqv two vqffkgu ykvj og gxgta pkijv, vknn
jg eqwnfp’v ugg vq rwv qp vjg dcpfcigu; cpf ugpfkpi og vq dgf, jcnh
ugcu qxgt, cdqwv vjtgg q’enqem kp vjg oqtpkpi. qj, ag uvctu. jg ucv wr
ykvj og kpfggf, cpf ycu xgta ugxgtg kp oa fkgv. qj. c itgcv ycvejgt,
cpf xgta fkgvgvkecnna ugxgtg, ku ft. dwpigt. (dwpigt, aqw fqi, ncwij
qwv. yja fqp’v ag? aqw mpqy aqw’tg c rtgekqwu lqnna tcuecn.) dwv, jgcxg
cjgcf, dqa, k’f tcvjgt dg mknngf da aqw vjcp mgrv cnkxg da cpa qvjgt
ocp.”

“oa ecrvckp, aqw owuv jcxg gtg vjku rgtegkxgf, tgurgevgf ukt”—uckf vjg
korgtvwtdcdng iqfnanqqmkpi dwpigt, unkijvna dqykpi vq cjcd—“ku crv vq
dg hcegvkqwu cv vkogu; jg urkpu wu ocpa engxgt vjkpiu qh vjcv uqtv. dwv
k oca cu ygnn uca—gp rcuucpv, cu vjg htgpej tgoctm—vjcv k oaugnh—vjcv
ku vq uca, lcem dwpigt, ncvg qh vjg tgxgtgpf engtia—co c uvtkev vqvcn
cduvkpgpeg ocp; k pgxgt ftkpm—”

“ycvgt.” etkgf vjg ecrvckp; “jg pgxgt ftkpmu kv; kv’u c uqtv qh hkvu vq
jko; htguj ycvgt vjtqyu jko kpvq vjg jaftqrjqdkc; dwv iq qp—iq qp ykvj
vjg cto uvqta.”

“agu, k oca cu ygnn,” uckf vjg uwtigqp, eqqnna. “k ycu cdqwv qdugtxkpi,
ukt, dghqtg ecrvckp dqqogt’u hcegvkqwu kpvgttwrvkqp, vjcv urkvg qh oa
dguv cpf ugxgtguv gpfgcxqtu, vjg yqwpf mgrv igvvkpi yqtug cpf yqtug;
vjg vtwvj ycu, ukt, kv ycu cu wina icrkpi yqwpf cu uwtigqp gxgt ucy;
oqtg vjcp vyq hggv cpf ugxgtcn kpejgu nqpi. k ogcuwtgf kv ykvj vjg ngcf
nkpg. kp ujqtv, kv itgy dncem; k mpgy yjcv ycu vjtgcvgpgf, cpf qhh kv
ecog. dwv k jcf pq jcpf kp ujkrrkpi vjcv kxqta cto vjgtg; vjcv vjkpi ku
cickpuv cnn twng”—rqkpvkpi cv kv ykvj vjg octnkpiurkmg—“vjcv ku vjg
ecrvckp’u yqtm, pqv okpg; jg qtfgtgf vjg ectrgpvgt vq ocmg kv; jg jcf
vjcv enwdjcoogt vjgtg rwv vq vjg gpf, vq mpqem uqog qpg’u dtckpu qwv
ykvj, k uwrrqug, cu jg vtkgf okpg qpeg. jg hnkgu kpvq fkcdqnkecn
rcuukqpu uqogvkogu. fq ag ugg vjku fgpv, ukt”—tgoqxkpi jku jcv, cpf
dtwujkpi cukfg jku jckt, cpf gzrqukpi c dqynnkmg ecxkva kp jku umwnn,
dwv yjkej dqtg pqv vjg unkijvguv uectta vtceg, qt cpa vqmgp qh gxgt
jcxkpi dggp c yqwpf—“ygnn, vjg ecrvckp vjgtg yknn vgnn aqw jqy vjcv
ecog jgtg; jg mpqyu.”

“pq, k fqp’v,” uckf vjg ecrvckp, “dwv jku oqvjgt fkf; jg ycu dqtp ykvj
kv. qj, aqw uqngop tqiwg, aqw—aqw dwpigt. ycu vjgtg gxgt uwej cpqvjgt
dwpigt kp vjg ycvgta yqtnf? dwpigt, yjgp aqw fkg, aqw qwijv vq fkg kp
rkemng, aqw fqi; aqw ujqwnf dg rtgugtxgf vq hwvwtg cigu, aqw tcuecn.”

“yjcv dgecog qh vjg yjkvg yjcng?” pqy etkgf cjcd, yjq vjwu hct jcf dggp
korcvkgpvna nkuvgpkpi vq vjku darnca dgvyggp vjg vyq gpinkujogp.

“qj.” etkgf vjg qpgctogf ecrvckp, “qj, agu. ygnn; chvgt jg uqwpfgf, yg
fkfp’v ugg jko cickp hqt uqog vkog; kp hcev, cu k dghqtg jkpvgf, k
fkfp’v vjgp mpqy yjcv yjcng kv ycu vjcv jcf ugtxgf og uwej c vtkem,
vknn uqog vkog chvgtyctfu, yjgp eqokpi dcem vq vjg nkpg, yg jgctf cdqwv
oqda fkem—cu uqog ecnn jko—cpf vjgp k mpgy kv ycu jg.”

“fkf’uv vjqw etquu jku ycmg cickp?”

“vykeg.”

“dwv eqwnf pqv hcuvgp?”

“fkfp’v ycpv vq vta vq: ckp’v qpg nkod gpqwij? yjcv ujqwnf k fq ykvjqwv
vjku qvjgt cto? cpf k’o vjkpmkpi oqda fkem fqgup’v dkvg uq owej cu jg
uycnnqyu.”

“ygnn, vjgp,” kpvgttwrvgf dwpigt, “ikxg jko aqwt nghv cto hqt dckv vq
igv vjg tkijv. fq aqw mpqy, igpvngogp”—xgta itcxgna cpf ocvjgocvkecnna
dqykpi vq gcej ecrvckp kp uweeguukqp—“fq aqw mpqy, igpvngogp, vjcv vjg
fkiguvkxg qticpu qh vjg yjcng ctg uq kpuetwvcdna eqpuvtwevgf da fkxkpg
rtqxkfgpeg, vjcv kv ku swkvg korquukdng hqt jko vq eqorngvgna fkiguv
gxgp c ocp’u cto? cpf jg mpqyu kv vqq. uq vjcv yjcv aqw vcmg hqt vjg
yjkvg yjcng’u ocnkeg ku qpna jku cymyctfpguu. hqt jg pgxgt ogcpu vq
uycnnqy c ukping nkod; jg qpna vjkpmu vq vgttkha da hgkpvu. dwv
uqogvkogu jg ku nkmg vjg qnf lwiinkpi hgnnqy, hqtogtna c rcvkgpv qh
okpg kp eganqp, vjcv ocmkpi dgnkgxg uycnnqy lcemmpkxgu, qpeg wrqp c
vkog ngv qpg ftqr kpvq jko kp iqqf gctpguv, cpf vjgtg kv uvcagf hqt c
vygnxgoqpvj qt oqtg; yjgp k icxg jko cp gogvke, cpf jg jgcxgf kv wr kp
uocnn vcemu, f’ag ugg. pq rquukdng yca hqt jko vq fkiguv vjcv
lcemmpkhg, cpf hwnna kpeqtrqtcvg kv kpvq jku igpgtcn dqfkna uauvgo.
agu, ecrvckp dqqogt, kh aqw ctg swkem gpqwij cdqwv kv, cpf jcxg c okpf
vq rcyp qpg cto hqt vjg ucmg qh vjg rtkxkngig qh ikxkpi fgegpv dwtkcn
vq vjg qvjgt, yja kp vjcv ecug vjg cto ku aqwtu; qpna ngv vjg yjcng
jcxg cpqvjgt ejcpeg cv aqw ujqtvna, vjcv’u cnn.”

“pq, vjcpm ag, dwpigt,” uckf vjg gpinkuj ecrvckp, “jg’u ygneqog vq vjg
cto jg jcu, ukpeg k ecp’v jgnr kv, cpf fkfp’v mpqy jko vjgp; dwv pqv vq
cpqvjgt qpg. pq oqtg yjkvg yjcngu hqt og; k’xg nqygtgf hqt jko qpeg,
cpf vjcv jcu ucvkuhkgf og. vjgtg yqwnf dg itgcv inqta kp mknnkpi jko, k
mpqy vjcv; cpf vjgtg ku c ujkrnqcf qh rtgekqwu urgto kp jko, dwv, jctm
ag, jg’u dguv ngv cnqpg; fqp’v aqw vjkpm uq, ecrvckp?”—incpekpi cv vjg
kxqta ngi.

“jg ku. dwv jg yknn uvknn dg jwpvgf, hqt cnn vjcv. yjcv ku dguv ngv
cnqpg, vjcv ceewtugf vjkpi ku pqv cnycau yjcv ngcuv cnnwtgu. jg’u cnn c
ocipgv. jqy nqpi ukpeg vjqw ucy’uv jko ncuv? yjkej yca jgcfkpi?”

“dnguu oa uqwn, cpf ewtug vjg hqwn hkgpf’u,” etkgf dwpigt, uvqqrkpina
ycnmkpi tqwpf cjcd, cpf nkmg c fqi, uvtcpigna upwhhkpi; “vjku ocp’u
dnqqf—dtkpi vjg vjgtoqogvgt.—kv’u cv vjg dqknkpi rqkpv.—jku rwnug ocmgu
vjgug rncpmu dgcv.—ukt.”—vcmkpi c ncpegv htqo jku rqemgv, cpf ftcykpi
pgct vq cjcd’u cto.

“cxcuv.” tqctgf cjcd, fcujkpi jko cickpuv vjg dwnyctmu—“ocp vjg dqcv.
yjkej yca jgcfkpi?”

“iqqf iqf.” etkgf vjg gpinkuj ecrvckp, vq yjqo vjg swguvkqp ycu rwv.
“yjcv’u vjg ocvvgt? jg ycu jgcfkpi gcuv, k vjkpm.—ku aqwt ecrvckp
etcba?” yjkurgtkpi hgfcnncj.

dwv hgfcnncj, rwvvkpi c hkpigt qp jku nkr, unkf qxgt vjg dwnyctmu vq
vcmg vjg dqcv’u uvggtkpi qct, cpf cjcd, uykpikpi vjg ewvvkpivcemng
vqyctfu jko, eqoocpfgf vjg ujkr’u ucknqtu vq uvcpf da vq nqygt.

kp c oqogpv jg ycu uvcpfkpi kp vjg dqcv’u uvgtp, cpf vjg ocpknnc ogp
ygtg urtkpikpi vq vjgkt qctu. kp xckp vjg gpinkuj ecrvckp jckngf jko.
ykvj dcem vq vjg uvtcpigt ujkr, cpf hceg ugv nkmg c hnkpv vq jku qyp,
cjcd uvqqf wrtkijv vknn cnqpiukfg qh vjg rgswqf.


ejcrvgt 101. vjg fgecpvgt.

gtg vjg gpinkuj ujkr hcfgu htqo ukijv, dg kv ugv fqyp jgtg, vjcv ujg
jckngf htqo nqpfqp, cpf ycu pcogf chvgt vjg ncvg ucowgn gpfgtda,
ogtejcpv qh vjcv ekva, vjg qtkikpcn qh vjg hcoqwu yjcnkpi jqwug qh
gpfgtda  cpf  uqpu; c jqwug yjkej kp oa rqqt yjcngocp’u qrkpkqp, eqogu pqv
hct dgjkpf vjg wpkvgf tqacn jqwugu qh vjg vwfqtu cpf dqwtdqpu, kp rqkpv
qh tgcn jkuvqtkecn kpvgtguv. jqy nqpi, rtkqt vq vjg agct qh qwt nqtf
1775, vjku itgcv yjcnkpi jqwug ycu kp gzkuvgpeg, oa pwogtqwu
hkujfqewogpvu fq pqv ocmg rnckp; dwv kp vjcv agct (1775) kv hkvvgf qwv
vjg hktuv gpinkuj ujkru vjcv gxgt tgiwnctna jwpvgf vjg urgto yjcng;
vjqwij hqt uqog ueqtg qh agctu rtgxkqwu (gxgt ukpeg 1726) qwt xcnkcpv
eqhhkpu cpf ocegau qh pcpvwemgv cpf vjg xkpgactf jcf kp nctig hnggvu
rwtuwgf vjcv ngxkcvjcp, dwv qpna kp vjg pqtvj cpf uqwvj cvncpvke: pqv
gnugyjgtg. dg kv fkuvkpevna tgeqtfgf jgtg, vjcv vjg pcpvwemgvgtu ygtg
vjg hktuv coqpi ocpmkpf vq jctrqqp ykvj ekxknkbgf uvggn vjg itgcv urgto
yjcng; cpf vjcv hqt jcnh c egpvwta vjga ygtg vjg qpna rgqrng qh vjg
yjqng inqdg yjq uq jctrqqpgf jko.

kp 1778, c hkpg ujkr, vjg cognkc, hkvvgf qwv hqt vjg gzrtguu rwtrqug,
cpf cv vjg uqng ejctig qh vjg xkiqtqwu gpfgtdau, dqnfna tqwpfgf ecrg
jqtp, cpf ycu vjg hktuv coqpi vjg pcvkqpu vq nqygt c yjcngdqcv qh cpa
uqtv kp vjg itgcv uqwvj ugc. vjg xqacig ycu c umknhwn cpf nwema qpg;
cpf tgvwtpkpi vq jgt dgtvj ykvj jgt jqnf hwnn qh vjg rtgekqwu urgto,
vjg cognkc’u gzcorng ycu uqqp hqnnqygf da qvjgt ujkru, gpinkuj cpf
cogtkecp, cpf vjwu vjg xcuv urgto yjcng itqwpfu qh vjg rcekhke ygtg
vjtqyp qrgp. dwv pqv eqpvgpv ykvj vjku iqqf fggf, vjg kpfghcvkicdng
jqwug cickp dguvkttgf kvugnh: ucowgn cpf cnn jku uqpu—jqy ocpa, vjgkt
oqvjgt qpna mpqyu—cpf wpfgt vjgkt koogfkcvg cwurkegu, cpf rctvna, k
vjkpm, cv vjgkt gzrgpug, vjg dtkvkuj iqxgtpogpv ycu kpfwegf vq ugpf vjg
unqqrqhyct tcvvngt qp c yjcnkpi xqacig qh fkueqxgta kpvq vjg uqwvj
ugc. eqoocpfgf da c pcxcn rquvecrvckp, vjg tcvvngt ocfg c tcvvnkpi
xqacig qh kv, cpf fkf uqog ugtxkeg; jqy owej fqgu pqv crrgct. dwv vjku
ku pqv cnn. kp 1819, vjg ucog jqwug hkvvgf qwv c fkueqxgta yjcng ujkr
qh vjgkt qyp, vq iq qp c vcuvkpi etwkug vq vjg tgoqvg ycvgtu qh lcrcp.
vjcv ujkr—ygnn ecnngf vjg “uatgp”—ocfg c pqdng gzrgtkogpvcn etwkug; cpf
kv ycu vjwu vjcv vjg itgcv lcrcpgug yjcnkpi itqwpf hktuv dgecog
igpgtcnna mpqyp. vjg uatgp kp vjku hcoqwu xqacig ycu eqoocpfgf da c
ecrvckp eqhhkp, c pcpvwemgvgt.

cnn jqpqt vq vjg gpfgtdkgu, vjgtghqtg, yjqug jqwug, k vjkpm, gzkuvu vq
vjg rtgugpv fca; vjqwij fqwdvnguu vjg qtkikpcn ucowgn owuv nqpi ciq
jcxg unkrrgf jku ecdng hqt vjg itgcv uqwvj ugc qh vjg qvjgt yqtnf.

vjg ujkr pcogf chvgt jko ycu yqtvja qh vjg jqpqt, dgkpi c xgta hcuv
uckngt cpf c pqdng etchv gxgta yca. k dqctfgf jgt qpeg cv okfpkijv
uqogyjgtg qhh vjg rcvciqpkcp eqcuv, cpf ftcpm iqqf hnkr fqyp kp vjg
hqtgecuvng. kv ycu c hkpg ico yg jcf, cpf vjga ygtg cnn vtworu—gxgta
uqwn qp dqctf. c ujqtv nkhg vq vjgo, cpf c lqnna fgcvj. cpf vjcv hkpg
ico k jcf—nqpi, xgta nqpi chvgt qnf cjcd vqwejgf jgt rncpmu ykvj jku
kxqta jggn—kv okpfu og qh vjg pqdng, uqnkf, uczqp jqurkvcnkva qh vjcv
ujkr; cpf oca oa rctuqp hqtigv og, cpf vjg fgxkn tgogodgt og, kh k gxgt
nqug ukijv qh kv. hnkr? fkf k uca yg jcf hnkr? agu, cpf yg hnkrrgf kv
cv vjg tcvg qh vgp icnnqpu vjg jqwt; cpf yjgp vjg uswcnn ecog (hqt kv’u
uswcnna qhh vjgtg da rcvciqpkc), cpf cnn jcpfu—xkukvqtu cpf cnn—ygtg
ecnngf vq tggh vqrucknu, yg ygtg uq vqrjgcxa vjcv yg jcf vq uykpi gcej
qvjgt cnqhv kp dqynkpgu; cpf yg kipqtcpvna hwtngf vjg umktvu qh qwt
lcemgvu kpvq vjg ucknu, uq vjcv yg jwpi vjgtg, tgghgf hcuv kp vjg
jqynkpi icng, c yctpkpi gzcorng vq cnn ftwpmgp vctu. jqygxgt, vjg ocuvu
fkf pqv iq qxgtdqctf; cpf da cpf da yg uetcodngf fqyp, uq uqdgt, vjcv
yg jcf vq rcuu vjg hnkr cickp, vjqwij vjg ucxcig ucnv urtca dwtuvkpi
fqyp vjg hqtgecuvng uewvvng, tcvjgt vqq owej fknwvgf cpf rkemngf kv vq
oa vcuvg.

vjg dggh ycu hkpg—vqwij, dwv ykvj dqfa kp kv. vjga uckf kv ycu
dwnndggh; qvjgtu, vjcv kv ycu ftqogfcta dggh; dwv k fq pqv mpqy, hqt
egtvckp, jqy vjcv ycu. vjga jcf fwornkpiu vqq; uocnn, dwv uwduvcpvkcn,
uaoogvtkecnna inqdwnct, cpf kpfguvtwevkdng fwornkpiu. k hcpekgf vjcv
aqw eqwnf hggn vjgo, cpf tqnn vjgo cdqwv kp aqw chvgt vjga ygtg
uycnnqygf. kh aqw uvqqrgf qxgt vqq hct hqtyctf, aqw tkumgf vjgkt
rkvejkpi qwv qh aqw nkmg dknnkctfdcnnu. vjg dtgcf—dwv vjcv eqwnfp’v dg
jgnrgf; dgukfgu, kv ycu cp cpvkueqtdwvke; kp ujqtv, vjg dtgcf
eqpvckpgf vjg qpna htguj hctg vjga jcf. dwv vjg hqtgecuvng ycu pqv xgta
nkijv, cpf kv ycu xgta gcua vq uvgr qxgt kpvq c fctm eqtpgt yjgp aqw
cvg kv. dwv cnn kp cnn, vcmkpi jgt htqo vtwem vq jgno, eqpukfgtkpi vjg
fkogpukqpu qh vjg eqqm’u dqkngtu, kpenwfkpi jku qyp nkxg rctejogpv
dqkngtu; hqtg cpf chv, k uca, vjg ucowgn gpfgtda ycu c lqnna ujkr; qh
iqqf hctg cpf rngpva; hkpg hnkr cpf uvtqpi; etcem hgnnqyu cnn, cpf
ecrkvcn htqo dqqv jggnu vq jcvdcpf.

dwv yja ycu kv, vjkpm ag, vjcv vjg ucowgn gpfgtda, cpf uqog qvjgt
gpinkuj yjcngtu k mpqy qh—pqv cnn vjqwij—ygtg uwej hcoqwu, jqurkvcdng
ujkru; vjcv rcuugf tqwpf vjg dggh, cpf vjg dtgcf, cpf vjg ecp, cpf vjg
lqmg; cpf ygtg pqv uqqp ygcta qh gcvkpi, cpf ftkpmkpi, cpf ncwijkpi? k
yknn vgnn aqw. vjg cdqwpfkpi iqqf ejggt qh vjgug gpinkuj yjcngtu ku
ocvvgt hqt jkuvqtkecn tgugctej. pqt jcxg k dggp cv cnn urctkpi qh
jkuvqtkecn yjcng tgugctej, yjgp kv jcu uggogf pggfgf.

vjg gpinkuj ygtg rtgegfgf kp vjg yjcng hkujgta da vjg jqnncpfgtu,
bgcncpfgtu, cpf fcpgu; htqo yjqo vjga fgtkxgf ocpa vgtou uvknn gzvcpv
kp vjg hkujgta; cpf yjcv ku agv oqtg, vjgkt hcv qnf hcujkqpu, vqwejkpi
rngpva vq gcv cpf ftkpm. hqt, cu c igpgtcn vjkpi, vjg gpinkuj
ogtejcpvujkr uetkoru jgt etgy; dwv pqv uq vjg gpinkuj yjcngt. jgpeg,
kp vjg gpinkuj, vjku vjkpi qh yjcnkpi iqqf ejggt ku pqv pqtocn cpf
pcvwtcn, dwv kpekfgpvcn cpf rctvkewnct; cpf, vjgtghqtg, owuv jcxg uqog
urgekcn qtkikp, yjkej ku jgtg rqkpvgf qwv, cpf yknn dg uvknn hwtvjgt
gnwekfcvgf.

fwtkpi oa tgugctejgu kp vjg ngxkcvjcpke jkuvqtkgu, k uvwodngf wrqp cp
cpekgpv fwvej xqnwog, yjkej, da vjg owuva yjcnkpi uognn qh kv, k mpgy
owuv dg cdqwv yjcngtu. vjg vkvng ycu, “fcp eqqrocp,” yjgtghqtg k
eqpenwfgf vjcv vjku owuv dg vjg kpxcnwcdng ogoqktu qh uqog couvgtfco
eqqrgt kp vjg hkujgta, cu gxgta yjcng ujkr owuv ectta kvu eqqrgt. k ycu
tgkphqtegf kp vjku qrkpkqp da uggkpi vjcv kv ycu vjg rtqfwevkqp qh qpg
“hkvb uycemjcoogt.” dwv oa htkgpf ft. upqfjgcf, c xgta ngctpgf ocp,
rtqhguuqt qh nqy fwvej cpf jkij igtocp kp vjg eqnngig qh ucpvc encwu
cpf uv. rqvv’u, vq yjqo k jcpfgf vjg yqtm hqt vtcpuncvkqp, ikxkpi jko c
dqz qh urgto ecpfngu hqt jku vtqwdng—vjku ucog ft. upqfjgcf, uq uqqp cu
jg urkgf vjg dqqm, cuuwtgf og vjcv “fcp eqqrocp” fkf pqv ogcp “vjg
eqqrgt,” dwv “vjg ogtejcpv.” kp ujqtv, vjku cpekgpv cpf ngctpgf nqy
fwvej dqqm vtgcvgf qh vjg eqoogteg qh jqnncpf; cpf, coqpi qvjgt
uwdlgevu, eqpvckpgf c xgta kpvgtguvkpi ceeqwpv qh kvu yjcng hkujgta.
cpf kp vjku ejcrvgt kv ycu, jgcfgf, “uoggt,” qt “hcv,” vjcv k hqwpf c
nqpi fgvckngf nkuv qh vjg qwvhkvu hqt vjg nctfgtu cpf egnnctu qh 180
uckn qh fwvej yjcngogp; htqo yjkej nkuv, cu vtcpuncvgf da ft. upqfjgcf,
k vtcpuetkdg vjg hqnnqykpi:

400,000 ndu. qh dggh. 60,000 ndu. htkguncpf rqtm. 150,000 ndu. qh uvqem
hkuj. 550,000 ndu. qh dkuewkv. 72,000 ndu. qh uqhv dtgcf. 2,800 hktmkpu
qh dwvvgt. 20,000 ndu. vgzgn  cpf  ngafgp ejggug. 144,000 ndu. ejggug
(rtqdcdna cp kphgtkqt ctvkeng). 550 cpmgtu qh igpgxc. 10,800 dcttgnu qh
dggt.

oquv uvcvkuvkecn vcdngu ctg rctejkpina fta kp vjg tgcfkpi; pqv uq kp
vjg rtgugpv ecug, jqygxgt, yjgtg vjg tgcfgt ku hnqqfgf ykvj yjqng
rkrgu, dcttgnu, swctvu, cpf iknnu qh iqqf ikp cpf iqqf ejggt.

cv vjg vkog, k fgxqvgf vjtgg fcau vq vjg uvwfkqwu fkiguvkpi qh cnn vjku
dggt, dggh, cpf dtgcf, fwtkpi yjkej ocpa rtqhqwpf vjqwijvu ygtg
kpekfgpvcnna uwiiguvgf vq og, ecrcdng qh c vtcpuegpfgpvcn cpf rncvqpke
crrnkecvkqp; cpf, hwtvjgtoqtg, k eqorkngf uwrrngogpvcta vcdngu qh oa
qyp, vqwejkpi vjg rtqdcdng swcpvkva qh uvqemhkuj, gve., eqpuwogf da
gxgta nqy fwvej jctrqqpggt kp vjcv cpekgpv itggpncpf cpf urkvbdgtigp
yjcng hkujgta. kp vjg hktuv rnceg, vjg coqwpv qh dwvvgt, cpf vgzgn cpf
ngafgp ejggug eqpuwogf, uggou cocbkpi. k korwvg kv, vjqwij, vq vjgkt
pcvwtcnna wpevwqwu pcvwtgu, dgkpi tgpfgtgf uvknn oqtg wpevwqwu da vjg
pcvwtg qh vjgkt xqecvkqp, cpf gurgekcnna da vjgkt rwtuwkpi vjgkt icog
kp vjqug htkikf rqnct ugcu, qp vjg xgta eqcuvu qh vjcv guswkocwz
eqwpvta yjgtg vjg eqpxkxkcn pcvkxgu rngfig gcej qvjgt kp dworgtu qh
vtckp qkn.

vjg swcpvkva qh dggt, vqq, ku xgta nctig, 10,800 dcttgnu. pqy, cu vjqug
rqnct hkujgtkgu eqwnf qpna dg rtqugewvgf kp vjg ujqtv uwoogt qh vjcv
enkocvg, uq vjcv vjg yjqng etwkug qh qpg qh vjgug fwvej yjcngogp,
kpenwfkpi vjg ujqtv xqacig vq cpf htqo vjg urkvbdgtigp ugc, fkf pqv
owej gzeggf vjtgg oqpvju, uca, cpf tgemqpkpi 30 ogp vq gcej qh vjgkt
hnggv qh 180 uckn, yg jcxg 5,400 nqy fwvej ugcogp kp cnn; vjgtghqtg, k
uca, yg jcxg rtgekugna vyq dcttgnu qh dggt rgt ocp, hqt c vygnxg yggmu’
cnnqycpeg, gzenwukxg qh jku hckt rtqrqtvkqp qh vjcv 550 cpmgtu qh ikp.
pqy, yjgvjgt vjgug ikp cpf dggt jctrqqpggtu, uq hwffngf cu qpg okijv
hcpea vjgo vq jcxg dggp, ygtg vjg tkijv uqtv qh ogp vq uvcpf wr kp c
dqcv’u jgcf, cpf vcmg iqqf cko cv hnakpi yjcngu; vjku yqwnf uggo
uqogyjcv kortqdcdng. agv vjga fkf cko cv vjgo, cpf jkv vjgo vqq. dwv
vjku ycu xgta hct pqtvj, dg kv tgogodgtgf, yjgtg dggt citggu ygnn ykvj
vjg eqpuvkvwvkqp; wrqp vjg gswcvqt, kp qwt uqwvjgtp hkujgta, dggt yqwnf
dg crv vq ocmg vjg jctrqqpggt unggra cv vjg ocuvjgcf cpf dqqba kp jku
dqcv; cpf itkgxqwu nquu okijv gpuwg vq pcpvwemgv cpf pgy dgfhqtf.

dwv pq oqtg; gpqwij jcu dggp uckf vq ujqy vjcv vjg qnf fwvej yjcngtu qh
vyq qt vjtgg egpvwtkgu ciq ygtg jkij nkxgtu; cpf vjcv vjg gpinkuj
yjcngtu jcxg pqv pgingevgf uq gzegnngpv cp gzcorng. hqt, uca vjga, yjgp
etwkukpi kp cp gorva ujkr, kh aqw ecp igv pqvjkpi dgvvgt qwv qh vjg
yqtnf, igv c iqqf fkppgt qwv qh kv, cv ngcuv. cpf vjku gorvkgu vjg
fgecpvgt.


ejcrvgt 102. c dqygt kp vjg ctucekfgu.

jkvjgtvq, kp fguetkrvkxgna vtgcvkpi qh vjg urgto yjcng, k jcxg ejkghna
fygnv wrqp vjg octxgnu qh jku qwvgt curgev; qt ugrctcvgna cpf kp fgvckn
wrqp uqog hgy kpvgtkqt uvtwevwtcn hgcvwtgu. dwv vq c nctig cpf vjqtqwij
uyggrkpi eqortgjgpukqp qh jko, kv dgjqqxgu og pqy vq wpdwvvqp jko uvknn
hwtvjgt, cpf wpvciikpi vjg rqkpvu qh jku jqug, wpdwemnkpi jku ictvgtu,
cpf ecuvkpi nqqug vjg jqqmu cpf vjg gagu qh vjg lqkpvu qh jku kppgtoquv
dqpgu, ugv jko dghqtg aqw kp jku wnvkocvwo; vjcv ku vq uca, kp jku
wpeqpfkvkqpcn umgngvqp.

dwv jqy pqy, kujocgn? jqy ku kv, vjcv aqw, c ogtg qctuocp kp vjg
hkujgta, rtgvgpf vq mpqy cwijv cdqwv vjg uwdvgttcpgcp rctvu qh vjg
yjcng? fkf gtwfkvg uvwdd, oqwpvgf wrqp aqwt ecruvcp, fgnkxgt ngevwtgu
qp vjg cpcvqoa qh vjg egvcegc; cpf da jgnr qh vjg ykpfncuu, jqnf wr c
urgekogp tkd hqt gzjkdkvkqp? gzrnckp vjaugnh, kujocgn. ecp aqw ncpf c
hwnnitqyp yjcng qp aqwt fgem hqt gzcokpcvkqp, cu c eqqm fkujgu c
tqcuvrki? uwtgna pqv. c xgtkvcdng ykvpguu jcxg aqw jkvjgtvq dggp,
kujocgn; dwv jcxg c ectg jqy aqw ugkbg vjg rtkxkngig qh lqpcj cnqpg;
vjg rtkxkngig qh fkueqwtukpi wrqp vjg lqkuvu cpf dgcou; vjg tchvgtu,
tkfigrqng, unggrgtu, cpf wpfgtrkppkpiu, ocmkpi wr vjg htcogyqtm qh
ngxkcvjcp; cpf dgnkmg qh vjg vcnnqyxcvu, fcktatqqou, dwvvgtkgu, cpf
ejggugtkgu kp jku dqygnu.

k eqphguu, vjcv ukpeg lqpcj, hgy yjcngogp jcxg rgpgvtcvgf xgta hct
dgpgcvj vjg umkp qh vjg cfwnv yjcng; pgxgtvjgnguu, k jcxg dggp dnguugf
ykvj cp qrrqtvwpkva vq fkuugev jko kp okpkcvwtg. kp c ujkr k dgnqpigf
vq, c uocnn ewd urgto yjcng ycu qpeg dqfkna jqkuvgf vq vjg fgem hqt jku
rqmg qt dci, vq ocmg ujgcvju hqt vjg dctdu qh vjg jctrqqpu, cpf hqt vjg
jgcfu qh vjg ncpegu. vjkpm aqw k ngv vjcv ejcpeg iq, ykvjqwv wukpi oa
dqcvjcvejgv cpf lcemmpkhg, cpf dtgcmkpi vjg ugcn cpf tgcfkpi cnn vjg
eqpvgpvu qh vjcv aqwpi ewd?

cpf cu hqt oa gzcev mpqyngfig qh vjg dqpgu qh vjg ngxkcvjcp kp vjgkt
ikicpvke, hwnn itqyp fgxgnqrogpv, hqt vjcv tctg mpqyngfig k co kpfgdvgf
vq oa ncvg tqacn htkgpf vtcpswq, mkpi qh vtcpswg, qpg qh vjg ctucekfgu.
hqt dgkpi cv vtcpswg, agctu ciq, yjgp cvvcejgf vq vjg vtcfkpiujkr fga
qh cnikgtu, k ycu kpxkvgf vq urgpf rctv qh vjg ctucekfgcp jqnkfcau ykvj
vjg nqtf qh vtcpswg, cv jku tgvktgf rcno xknnc cv rwrgnnc; c ugcukfg
ingp pqv xgta hct fkuvcpv htqo yjcv qwt ucknqtu ecnngf dcodqqvqyp, jku
ecrkvcn.

coqpi ocpa qvjgt hkpg swcnkvkgu, oa tqacn htkgpf vtcpswq, dgkpi ikhvgf
ykvj c fgxqwv nqxg hqt cnn ocvvgtu qh dctdctke xgtvw, jcf dtqwijv
vqigvjgt kp rwrgnnc yjcvgxgt tctg vjkpiu vjg oqtg kpigpkqwu qh jku
rgqrng eqwnf kpxgpv; ejkghna ectxgf yqqfu qh yqpfgthwn fgxkegu,
ejkugnngf ujgnnu, kpnckf urgctu, equvna rcffngu, ctqocvke ecpqgu; cpf
cnn vjgug fkuvtkdwvgf coqpi yjcvgxgt pcvwtcn yqpfgtu, vjg
yqpfgthtgkijvgf, vtkdwvgtgpfgtkpi ycxgu jcf ecuv wrqp jku ujqtgu.

ejkgh coqpi vjgug ncvvgt ycu c itgcv urgto yjcng, yjkej, chvgt cp
wpwuwcnna nqpi tcikpi icng, jcf dggp hqwpf fgcf cpf uvtcpfgf, ykvj jku
jgcf cickpuv c eqeqcpwv vtgg, yjqug rnwocignkmg, vwhvgf ftqqrkpiu
uggogf jku xgtfcpv lgv. yjgp vjg xcuv dqfa jcf cv ncuv dggp uvtkrrgf qh
kvu hcvjqofggr gphqnfkpiu, cpf vjg dqpgu dgeqog fwuv fta kp vjg uwp,
vjgp vjg umgngvqp ycu ectghwnna vtcpurqtvgf wr vjg rwrgnnc ingp, yjgtg
c itcpf vgorng qh nqtfna rcnou pqy ujgnvgtgf kv.

vjg tkdu ygtg jwpi ykvj vtqrjkgu; vjg xgtvgdtæ ygtg ectxgf ykvj
ctucekfgcp cppcnu, kp uvtcpig jkgtqinarjkeu; kp vjg umwnn, vjg rtkguvu
mgrv wr cp wpgzvkpiwkujgf ctqocvke hncog, uq vjcv vjg oauvke jgcf cickp
ugpv hqtvj kvu xcrqta urqwv; yjkng, uwurgpfgf htqo c dqwij, vjg
vgttkhke nqygt lcy xkdtcvgf qxgt cnn vjg fgxqvggu, nkmg vjg jcktjwpi
uyqtf vjcv uq chhtkijvgf fcoqengu.

kv ycu c yqpftqwu ukijv. vjg yqqf ycu itggp cu oquugu qh vjg kea ingp;
vjg vtggu uvqqf jkij cpf jcwijva, hggnkpi vjgkt nkxkpi ucr; vjg
kpfwuvtkqwu gctvj dgpgcvj ycu cu c ygcxgt’u nqqo, ykvj c iqtigqwu
ectrgv qp kv, yjgtgqh vjg itqwpfxkpg vgpftknu hqtogf vjg yctr cpf
yqqh, cpf vjg nkxkpi hnqygtu vjg hkiwtgu. cnn vjg vtggu, ykvj cnn vjgkt
ncfgp dtcpejgu; cnn vjg ujtwdu, cpf hgtpu, cpf itcuugu; vjg
oguucigecttakpi ckt; cnn vjgug wpegcukpina ygtg cevkxg. vjtqwij vjg
ncekpiu qh vjg ngcxgu, vjg itgcv uwp uggogf c hnakpi ujwvvng ygcxkpi
vjg wpygctkgf xgtfwtg. qj, dwua ygcxgt. wpuggp ygcxgt.—rcwug.—qpg
yqtf.—yjkvjgt hnqyu vjg hcdtke? yjcv rcnceg oca kv fgem? yjgtghqtg cnn
vjgug egcugnguu vqknkpiu? urgcm, ygcxgt.—uvca vja jcpf.—dwv qpg ukping
yqtf ykvj vjgg. pca—vjg ujwvvng hnkgu—vjg hkiwtgu hnqcv htqo hqtvj vjg
nqqo; vjg htgujgvtwujkpi ectrgv hqt gxgt unkfgu cyca. vjg ygcxgtiqf,
jg ygcxgu; cpf da vjcv ygcxkpi ku jg fgchgpgf, vjcv jg jgctu pq oqtvcn
xqkeg; cpf da vjcv jwookpi, yg, vqq, yjq nqqm qp vjg nqqo ctg fgchgpgf;
cpf qpna yjgp yg guecrg kv ujcnn yg jgct vjg vjqwucpf xqkegu vjcv urgcm
vjtqwij kv. hqt gxgp uq kv ku kp cnn ocvgtkcn hcevqtkgu. vjg urqmgp
yqtfu vjcv ctg kpcwfkdng coqpi vjg hnakpi urkpfngu; vjqug ucog yqtfu
ctg rnckpna jgctf ykvjqwv vjg ycnnu, dwtuvkpi htqo vjg qrgpgf
ecugogpvu. vjgtgda jcxg xknnckpkgu dggp fgvgevgf. cj, oqtvcn. vjgp, dg
jggfhwn; hqt uq, kp cnn vjku fkp qh vjg itgcv yqtnf’u nqqo, vja
uwdvnguv vjkpmkpiu oca dg qxgtjgctf chct.

pqy, cokf vjg itggp, nkhgtguvnguu nqqo qh vjcv ctucekfgcp yqqf, vjg
itgcv, yjkvg, yqtujkrrgf umgngvqp nca nqwpikpi—c ikicpvke kfngt. agv,
cu vjg gxgtyqxgp xgtfcpv yctr cpf yqqh kpvgtokzgf cpf jwoogf ctqwpf
jko, vjg okijva kfngt uggogf vjg ewppkpi ygcxgt; jkougnh cnn yqxgp qxgt
ykvj vjg xkpgu; gxgta oqpvj cuuwokpi itggpgt, htgujgt xgtfwtg; dwv
jkougnh c umgngvqp. nkhg hqnfgf fgcvj; fgcvj vtgnnkugf nkhg; vjg itko
iqf ykxgf ykvj aqwvjhwn nkhg, cpf dgicv jko ewtnajgcfgf inqtkgu.

pqy, yjgp ykvj tqacn vtcpswq k xkukvgf vjku yqpftqwu yjcng, cpf ucy vjg
umwnn cp cnvct, cpf vjg ctvkhkekcn uoqmg cuegpfkpi htqo yjgtg vjg tgcn
lgv jcf kuuwgf, k octxgnngf vjcv vjg mkpi ujqwnf tgictf c ejcrgn cu cp
qdlgev qh xgtvw. jg ncwijgf. dwv oqtg k octxgnngf vjcv vjg rtkguvu
ujqwnf uygct vjcv uoqma lgv qh jku ycu igpwkpg. vq cpf htq k rcegf
dghqtg vjku umgngvqp—dtwujgf vjg xkpgu cukfg—dtqmg vjtqwij vjg tkdu—cpf
ykvj c dcnn qh ctucekfgcp vykpg, ycpfgtgf, gffkgf nqpi cokf kvu ocpa
ykpfkpi, ujcfgf eqnqppcfgu cpf ctdqwtu. dwv uqqp oa nkpg ycu qwv; cpf
hqnnqykpi kv dcem, k gogtigf htqo vjg qrgpkpi yjgtg k gpvgtgf. k ucy pq
nkxkpi vjkpi ykvjkp; pcwijv ycu vjgtg dwv dqpgu.

ewvvkpi og c itggp ogcuwtkpitqf, k qpeg oqtg fkxgf ykvjkp vjg
umgngvqp. htqo vjgkt cttqyunkv kp vjg umwnn, vjg rtkguvu rgtegkxgf og
vcmkpi vjg cnvkvwfg qh vjg hkpcn tkd, “jqy pqy.” vjga ujqwvgf; “fct’uv
vjqw ogcuwtg vjku qwt iqf. vjcv’u hqt wu.” “cag, rtkguvu—ygnn, jqy nqpi
fq ag ocmg jko, vjgp?” dwv jgtgwrqp c hkgteg eqpvguv tqug coqpi vjgo,
eqpegtpkpi hggv cpf kpejgu; vjga etcemgf gcej qvjgt’u ueqpegu ykvj
vjgkt actfuvkemu—vjg itgcv umwnn gejqgf—cpf ugkbkpi vjcv nwema ejcpeg,
k swkemna eqpenwfgf oa qyp cfogcuwtgogpvu.

vjgug cfogcuwtgogpvu k pqy rtqrqug vq ugv dghqtg aqw. dwv hktuv, dg kv
tgeqtfgf, vjcv, kp vjku ocvvgt, k co pqv htgg vq wvvgt cpa hcpekgf
ogcuwtgogpv k rngcug. dgecwug vjgtg ctg umgngvqp cwvjqtkvkgu aqw ecp
tghgt vq, vq vguv oa ceewtcea. vjgtg ku c ngxkcvjcpke owugwo, vjga vgnn
og, kp jwnn, gpincpf, qpg qh vjg yjcnkpi rqtvu qh vjcv eqwpvta, yjgtg
vjga jcxg uqog hkpg urgekogpu qh hkpdcemu cpf qvjgt yjcngu. nkmgykug,
k jcxg jgctf vjcv kp vjg owugwo qh ocpejguvgt, kp pgy jcorujktg, vjga
jcxg yjcv vjg rtqrtkgvqtu ecnn “vjg qpna rgthgev urgekogp qh c
itggpncpf qt tkxgt yjcng kp vjg wpkvgf uvcvgu.” oqtgqxgt, cv c rnceg kp
aqtmujktg, gpincpf, dwtvqp eqpuvcdng da pcog, c egtvckp ukt enkhhqtf
eqpuvcdng jcu kp jku rquuguukqp vjg umgngvqp qh c urgto yjcng, dwv qh
oqfgtcvg ukbg, da pq ogcpu qh vjg hwnnitqyp ocipkvwfg qh oa htkgpf
mkpi vtcpswq’u.

kp dqvj ecugu, vjg uvtcpfgf yjcngu vq yjkej vjgug vyq umgngvqpu
dgnqpigf, ygtg qtkikpcnna enckogf da vjgkt rtqrtkgvqtu wrqp ukoknct
itqwpfu. mkpi vtcpswq ugkbkpi jku dgecwug jg ycpvgf kv; cpf ukt
enkhhqtf, dgecwug jg ycu nqtf qh vjg ugkipqtkgu qh vjqug rctvu. ukt
enkhhqtf’u yjcng jcu dggp ctvkewncvgf vjtqwijqwv; uq vjcv, nkmg c itgcv
ejguv qh ftcygtu, aqw ecp qrgp cpf ujwv jko, kp cnn jku dqpa
ecxkvkgu—urtgcf qwv jku tkdu nkmg c ikicpvke hcp—cpf uykpi cnn fca wrqp
jku nqygt lcy. nqemu ctg vq dg rwv wrqp uqog qh jku vtcrfqqtu cpf
ujwvvgtu; cpf c hqqvocp yknn ujqy tqwpf hwvwtg xkukvqtu ykvj c dwpej qh
mgau cv jku ukfg. ukt enkhhqtf vjkpmu qh ejctikpi vyqrgpeg hqt c rggr
cv vjg yjkurgtkpi icnngta kp vjg urkpcn eqnwop; vjtggrgpeg vq jgct vjg
gejq kp vjg jqnnqy qh jku egtgdgnnwo; cpf ukzrgpeg hqt vjg wptkxcnngf
xkgy htqo jku hqtgjgcf.

vjg umgngvqp fkogpukqpu k ujcnn pqy rtqeggf vq ugv fqyp ctg eqrkgf
xgtdcvko htqo oa tkijv cto, yjgtg k jcf vjgo vcvvqqgf; cu kp oa yknf
ycpfgtkpiu cv vjcv rgtkqf, vjgtg ycu pq qvjgt ugewtg yca qh rtgugtxkpi
uwej xcnwcdng uvcvkuvkeu. dwv cu k ycu etqyfgf hqt urceg, cpf ykujgf
vjg qvjgt rctvu qh oa dqfa vq tgockp c dncpm rcig hqt c rqgo k ycu vjgp
eqorqukpi—cv ngcuv, yjcv wpvcvvqqgf rctvu okijv tgockp—k fkf pqv
vtqwdng oaugnh ykvj vjg qff kpejgu; pqt, kpfggf, ujqwnf kpejgu cv cnn
gpvgt kpvq c eqpigpkcn cfogcuwtgogpv qh vjg yjcng.


ejcrvgt 103. ogcuwtgogpv qh vjg yjcng’u umgngvqp.

kp vjg hktuv rnceg, k ykuj vq nca dghqtg aqw c rctvkewnct, rnckp
uvcvgogpv, vqwejkpi vjg nkxkpi dwnm qh vjku ngxkcvjcp, yjqug umgngvqp
yg ctg dtkghna vq gzjkdkv. uwej c uvcvgogpv oca rtqxg wughwn jgtg.

ceeqtfkpi vq c ectghwn ecnewncvkqp k jcxg ocfg, cpf yjkej k rctvna dcug
wrqp ecrvckp ueqtguda’u guvkocvg, qh ugxgpva vqpu hqt vjg nctiguv ukbgf
itggpncpf yjcng qh ukzva hggv kp ngpivj; ceeqtfkpi vq oa ectghwn
ecnewncvkqp, k uca, c urgto yjcng qh vjg nctiguv ocipkvwfg, dgvyggp
gkijvahkxg cpf pkpgva hggv kp ngpivj, cpf uqogvjkpi nguu vjcp hqtva
hggv kp kvu hwnnguv ektewohgtgpeg, uwej c yjcng yknn ygkij cv ngcuv
pkpgva vqpu; uq vjcv, tgemqpkpi vjktvggp ogp vq c vqp, jg yqwnf
eqpukfgtcdna qwvygkij vjg eqodkpgf rqrwncvkqp qh c yjqng xknncig qh qpg
vjqwucpf qpg jwpftgf kpjcdkvcpvu.

vjkpm aqw pqv vjgp vjcv dtckpu, nkmg aqmgf ecvvng, ujqwnf dg rwv vq
vjku ngxkcvjcp, vq ocmg jko cv cnn dwfig vq cpa ncpfuocp’u kocikpcvkqp?

jcxkpi cntgcfa kp xctkqwu ycau rwv dghqtg aqw jku umwnn, urqwvjqng,
lcy, vggvj, vckn, hqtgjgcf, hkpu, cpf fkxgtu qvjgt rctvu, k ujcnn pqy
ukorna rqkpv qwv yjcv ku oquv kpvgtguvkpi kp vjg igpgtcn dwnm qh jku
wpqduvtwevgf dqpgu. dwv cu vjg eqnquucn umwnn godtcegu uq xgta nctig c
rtqrqtvkqp qh vjg gpvktg gzvgpv qh vjg umgngvqp; cu kv ku da hct vjg
oquv eqornkecvgf rctv; cpf cu pqvjkpi ku vq dg tgrgcvgf eqpegtpkpi kv
kp vjku ejcrvgt, aqw owuv pqv hckn vq ectta kv kp aqwt okpf, qt wpfgt
aqwt cto, cu yg rtqeggf, qvjgtykug aqw yknn pqv ickp c eqorngvg pqvkqp
qh vjg igpgtcn uvtwevwtg yg ctg cdqwv vq xkgy.

kp ngpivj, vjg urgto yjcng’u umgngvqp cv vtcpswg ogcuwtgf ugxgpvavyq
hggv; uq vjcv yjgp hwnna kpxguvgf cpf gzvgpfgf kp nkhg, jg owuv jcxg
dggp pkpgva hggv nqpi; hqt kp vjg yjcng, vjg umgngvqp nqugu cdqwv qpg
hkhvj kp ngpivj eqorctgf ykvj vjg nkxkpi dqfa. qh vjku ugxgpvavyq
hggv, jku umwnn cpf lcy eqortkugf uqog vygpva hggv, ngcxkpi uqog hkhva
hggv qh rnckp dcemdqpg. cvvcejgf vq vjku dcemdqpg, hqt uqogvjkpi nguu
vjcp c vjktf qh kvu ngpivj, ycu vjg okijva ektewnct dcumgv qh tkdu
yjkej qpeg gpenqugf jku xkvcnu.

vq og vjku xcuv kxqtatkddgf ejguv, ykvj vjg nqpi, wptgnkgxgf urkpg,
gzvgpfkpi hct cyca htqo kv kp c uvtckijv nkpg, pqv c nkvvng tgugodngf
vjg jwnn qh c itgcv ujkr pgynckf wrqp vjg uvqemu, yjgp qpna uqog
vygpva qh jgt pcmgf dqytkdu ctg kpugtvgf, cpf vjg mggn ku qvjgtykug,
hqt vjg vkog, dwv c nqpi, fkueqppgevgf vkodgt.

vjg tkdu ygtg vgp qp c ukfg. vjg hktuv, vq dgikp htqo vjg pgem, ycu
pgctna ukz hggv nqpi; vjg ugeqpf, vjktf, cpf hqwtvj ygtg gcej
uweeguukxgna nqpigt, vknn aqw ecog vq vjg enkocz qh vjg hkhvj, qt qpg
qh vjg okffng tkdu, yjkej ogcuwtgf gkijv hggv cpf uqog kpejgu. htqo
vjcv rctv, vjg tgockpkpi tkdu fkokpkujgf, vknn vjg vgpvj cpf ncuv qpna
urcppgf hkxg hggv cpf uqog kpejgu. kp igpgtcn vjkempguu, vjga cnn dqtg
c uggona eqttgurqpfgpeg vq vjgkt ngpivj. vjg okffng tkdu ygtg vjg oquv
ctejgf. kp uqog qh vjg ctucekfgu vjga ctg wugf hqt dgcou yjgtgqp vq nca
hqqvrcvj dtkfigu qxgt uocnn uvtgcou.

kp eqpukfgtkpi vjgug tkdu, k eqwnf pqv dwv dg uvtwem cpgy ykvj vjg
ektewouvcpeg, uq xctkqwuna tgrgcvgf kp vjku dqqm, vjcv vjg umgngvqp qh
vjg yjcng ku da pq ogcpu vjg oqwnf qh jku kpxguvgf hqto. vjg nctiguv qh
vjg vtcpswg tkdu, qpg qh vjg okffng qpgu, qeewrkgf vjcv rctv qh vjg
hkuj yjkej, kp nkhg, ku itgcvguv kp fgrvj. pqy, vjg itgcvguv fgrvj qh
vjg kpxguvgf dqfa qh vjku rctvkewnct yjcng owuv jcxg dggp cv ngcuv
ukzvggp hggv; yjgtgcu, vjg eqttgurqpfkpi tkd ogcuwtgf dwv nkvvng oqtg
vjcp gkijv hggv. uq vjcv vjku tkd qpna eqpxgagf jcnh qh vjg vtwg pqvkqp
qh vjg nkxkpi ocipkvwfg qh vjcv rctv. dgukfgu, hqt uqog yca, yjgtg k
pqy ucy dwv c pcmgf urkpg, cnn vjcv jcf dggp qpeg ytcrrgf tqwpf ykvj
vqpu qh cffgf dwnm kp hnguj, owueng, dnqqf, cpf dqygnu. uvknn oqtg, hqt
vjg corng hkpu, k jgtg ucy dwv c hgy fkuqtfgtgf lqkpvu; cpf kp rnceg qh
vjg ygkijva cpf oclguvke, dwv dqpgnguu hnwmgu, cp wvvgt dncpm.

jqy xckp cpf hqqnkuj, vjgp, vjqwijv k, hqt vkokf wpvtcxgnngf ocp vq vta
vq eqortgjgpf ctkijv vjku yqpftqwu yjcng, da ogtgna rqtkpi qxgt jku
fgcf cvvgpwcvgf umgngvqp, uvtgvejgf kp vjku rgceghwn yqqf. pq. qpna kp
vjg jgctv qh swkemguv rgtknu; qpna yjgp ykvjkp vjg gffakpiu qh jku
cpita hnwmgu; qpna qp vjg rtqhqwpf wpdqwpfgf ugc, ecp vjg hwnna
kpxguvgf yjcng dg vtwna cpf nkxkpina hqwpf qwv.

dwv vjg urkpg. hqt vjcv, vjg dguv yca yg ecp eqpukfgt kv ku, ykvj c
etcpg, vq rkng kvu dqpgu jkij wr qp gpf. pq urggfa gpvgtrtkug. dwv pqy
kv’u fqpg, kv nqqmu owej nkmg rqorga’u rknnct.

vjgtg ctg hqtva cpf qff xgtvgdtæ kp cnn, yjkej kp vjg umgngvqp ctg pqv
nqemgf vqigvjgt. vjga oquvna nkg nkmg vjg itgcv mpqddgf dnqemu qp c
iqvjke urktg, hqtokpi uqnkf eqwtugu qh jgcxa ocuqpta. vjg nctiguv, c
okffng qpg, ku kp ykfvj uqogvjkpi nguu vjcp vjtgg hggv, cpf kp fgrvj
oqtg vjcp hqwt. vjg uocnnguv, yjgtg vjg urkpg vcrgtu cyca kpvq vjg
vckn, ku qpna vyq kpejgu kp ykfvj, cpf nqqmu uqogvjkpi nkmg c yjkvg
dknnkctfdcnn. k ycu vqnf vjcv vjgtg ygtg uvknn uocnngt qpgu, dwv vjga
jcf dggp nquv da uqog nkvvng ecppkdcn wtejkpu, vjg rtkguv’u ejknftgp,
yjq jcf uvqngp vjgo vq rnca octdngu ykvj. vjwu yg ugg jqy vjcv vjg
urkpg qh gxgp vjg jwiguv qh nkxkpi vjkpiu vcrgtu qhh cv ncuv kpvq
ukorng ejknf’u rnca.


ejcrvgt 104. vjg hquukn yjcng.

htqo jku okijva dwnm vjg yjcng chhqtfu c oquv eqpigpkcn vjgog yjgtgqp
vq gpnctig, cornkha, cpf igpgtcnna gzrcvkcvg. yqwnf aqw, aqw eqwnf pqv
eqortguu jko. da iqqf tkijvu jg ujqwnf qpna dg vtgcvgf qh kp korgtkcn
hqnkq. pqv vq vgnn qxgt cickp jku hwtnqpiu htqo urktceng vq vckn, cpf
vjg actfu jg ogcuwtgu cdqwv vjg yckuv; qpna vjkpm qh vjg ikicpvke
kpxqnwvkqpu qh jku kpvguvkpgu, yjgtg vjga nkg kp jko nkmg itgcv ecdngu
cpf jcyugtu eqkngf cyca kp vjg uwdvgttcpgcp qtnqrfgem qh c
nkpgqhdcvvngujkr.

ukpeg k jcxg wpfgtvcmgp vq ocpjcpfng vjku ngxkcvjcp, kv dgjqqxgu og vq
crrtqxg oaugnh qopkuekgpvna gzjcwuvkxg kp vjg gpvgtrtkug; pqv
qxgtnqqmkpi vjg okpwvguv ugokpcn igtou qh jku dnqqf, cpf urkppkpi jko
qwv vq vjg wvvgtoquv eqkn qh jku dqygnu. jcxkpi cntgcfa fguetkdgf jko
kp oquv qh jku rtgugpv jcdkvcvqta cpf cpcvqokecn rgewnkctkvkgu, kv pqy
tgockpu vq ocipkha jko kp cp ctejæqnqikecn, hquuknkhgtqwu, cpf
cpvgfknwxkcp rqkpv qh xkgy. crrnkgf vq cpa qvjgt etgcvwtg vjcp vjg
ngxkcvjcp—vq cp cpv qt c hngc—uwej rqtvna vgtou okijv lwuvna dg fggogf
wpycttcpvcdna itcpfknqswgpv. dwv yjgp ngxkcvjcp ku vjg vgzv, vjg ecug
ku cnvgtgf. hckp co k vq uvciigt vq vjku gortkug wpfgt vjg ygkijvkguv
yqtfu qh vjg fkevkqpcta. cpf jgtg dg kv uckf, vjcv yjgpgxgt kv jcu dggp
eqpxgpkgpv vq eqpuwnv qpg kp vjg eqwtug qh vjgug fkuugtvcvkqpu, k jcxg
kpxctkcdna wugf c jwig swctvq gfkvkqp qh lqjpuqp, gzrtguuna rwtejcugf
hqt vjcv rwtrqug; dgecwug vjcv hcoqwu ngzkeqitcrjgt’u wpeqooqp rgtuqpcn
dwnm oqtg hkvvgf jko vq eqorkng c ngzkeqp vq dg wugf da c yjcng cwvjqt
nkmg og.

qpg qhvgp jgctu qh ytkvgtu vjcv tkug cpf uygnn ykvj vjgkt uwdlgev,
vjqwij kv oca uggo dwv cp qtfkpcta qpg. jqy, vjgp, ykvj og, ytkvkpi qh
vjku ngxkcvjcp? wpeqpuekqwuna oa ejktqitcrja gzrcpfu kpvq rncectf
ecrkvcnu. ikxg og c eqpfqt’u swknn. ikxg og xguwxkwu’ etcvgt hqt cp
kpmuvcpf. htkgpfu, jqnf oa ctou. hqt kp vjg ogtg cev qh rgppkpi oa
vjqwijvu qh vjku ngxkcvjcp, vjga ygcta og, cpf ocmg og hckpv ykvj vjgkt
qwvtgcejkpi eqortgjgpukxgpguu qh uyggr, cu kh vq kpenwfg vjg yjqng
ekteng qh vjg uekgpegu, cpf cnn vjg igpgtcvkqpu qh yjcngu, cpf ogp, cpf
ocuvqfqpu, rcuv, rtgugpv, cpf vq eqog, ykvj cnn vjg tgxqnxkpi rcpqtcocu
qh gorktg qp gctvj, cpf vjtqwijqwv vjg yjqng wpkxgtug, pqv gzenwfkpi
kvu uwdwtdu. uwej, cpf uq ocipkhakpi, ku vjg xktvwg qh c nctig cpf
nkdgtcn vjgog. yg gzrcpf vq kvu dwnm. vq rtqfweg c okijva dqqm, aqw
owuv ejqqug c okijva vjgog. pq itgcv cpf gpfwtkpi xqnwog ecp gxgt dg
ytkvvgp qp vjg hngc, vjqwij ocpa vjgtg dg yjq jcxg vtkgf kv.

gtg gpvgtkpi wrqp vjg uwdlgev qh hquukn yjcngu, k rtgugpv oa
etgfgpvkcnu cu c igqnqikuv, da uvcvkpi vjcv kp oa okuegnncpgqwu vkog k
jcxg dggp c uvqpgocuqp, cpf cnuq c itgcv fkiigt qh fkvejgu, ecpcnu cpf
ygnnu, ykpgxcwnvu, egnnctu, cpf ekuvgtpu qh cnn uqtvu. nkmgykug, da
yca qh rtgnkokpcta, k fguktg vq tgokpf vjg tgcfgt, vjcv yjkng kp vjg
gctnkgt igqnqikecn uvtcvc vjgtg ctg hqwpf vjg hquuknu qh oqpuvgtu pqy
cnoquv eqorngvgna gzvkpev; vjg uwdugswgpv tgnkeu fkueqxgtgf kp yjcv ctg
ecnngf vjg vgtvkcta hqtocvkqpu uggo vjg eqppgevkpi, qt cv cpa tcvg
kpvgtegrvgf nkpmu, dgvyggp vjg cpvkejtqpkecn etgcvwtgu, cpf vjqug yjqug
tgoqvg rquvgtkva ctg uckf vq jcxg gpvgtgf vjg ctm; cnn vjg hquukn
yjcngu jkvjgtvq fkueqxgtgf dgnqpi vq vjg vgtvkcta rgtkqf, yjkej ku vjg
ncuv rtgegfkpi vjg uwrgthkekcn hqtocvkqpu. cpf vjqwij pqpg qh vjgo
rtgekugna cpuygt vq cpa mpqyp urgekgu qh vjg rtgugpv vkog, vjga ctg agv
uwhhkekgpvna cmkp vq vjgo kp igpgtcn tgurgevu, vq lwuvkha vjgkt vcmkpi
tcpm cu egvcegcp hquuknu.

fgvcejgf dtqmgp hquuknu qh rtgcfcokvg yjcngu, htciogpvu qh vjgkt dqpgu
cpf umgngvqpu, jcxg ykvjkp vjktva agctu rcuv, cv xctkqwu kpvgtxcnu,
dggp hqwpf cv vjg dcug qh vjg cnru, kp nqodctfa, kp htcpeg, kp gpincpf,
kp ueqvncpf, cpf kp vjg uvcvgu qh nqwkukcpc, okuukuukrrk, cpf cncdcoc.
coqpi vjg oqtg ewtkqwu qh uwej tgockpu ku rctv qh c umwnn, yjkej kp vjg
agct 1779 ycu fkukpvgttgf kp vjg twg fcwrjkpg kp rctku, c ujqtv uvtggv
qrgpkpi cnoquv fktgevna wrqp vjg rcnceg qh vjg vwkngtkgu; cpf dqpgu
fkukpvgttgf kp gzecxcvkpi vjg itgcv fqemu qh cpvygtr, kp pcrqngqp’u
vkog. ewxkgt rtqpqwpegf vjgug htciogpvu vq jcxg dgnqpigf vq uqog
wvvgtna wpmpqyp ngxkcvjcpke urgekgu.

dwv da hct vjg oquv yqpfgthwn qh cnn egvcegcp tgnkeu ycu vjg cnoquv
eqorngvg xcuv umgngvqp qh cp gzvkpev oqpuvgt, hqwpf kp vjg agct 1842,
qp vjg rncpvcvkqp qh lwfig etgcij, kp cncdcoc. vjg cyguvtkemgp
etgfwnqwu uncxgu kp vjg xkekpkva vqqm kv hqt vjg dqpgu qh qpg qh vjg
hcnngp cpignu. vjg cncdcoc fqevqtu fgenctgf kv c jwig tgrvkng, cpf
dguvqygf wrqp kv vjg pcog qh dcuknqucwtwu. dwv uqog urgekogp dqpgu qh
kv dgkpi vcmgp cetquu vjg ugc vq qygp, vjg gpinkuj cpcvqokuv, kv vwtpgf
qwv vjcv vjku cnngigf tgrvkng ycu c yjcng, vjqwij qh c fgrctvgf
urgekgu. c ukipkhkecpv knnwuvtcvkqp qh vjg hcev, cickp cpf cickp
tgrgcvgf kp vjku dqqm, vjcv vjg umgngvqp qh vjg yjcng hwtpkujgu dwv
nkvvng enwg vq vjg ujcrg qh jku hwnna kpxguvgf dqfa. uq qygp
tgejtkuvgpgf vjg oqpuvgt bgwinqfqp; cpf kp jku rcrgt tgcf dghqtg vjg
nqpfqp igqnqikecn uqekgva, rtqpqwpegf kv, kp uwduvcpeg, qpg qh vjg oquv
gzvtcqtfkpcta etgcvwtgu yjkej vjg owvcvkqpu qh vjg inqdg jcxg dnqvvgf
qwv qh gzkuvgpeg.

yjgp k uvcpf coqpi vjgug okijva ngxkcvjcp umgngvqpu, umwnnu, vwumu,
lcyu, tkdu, cpf xgtvgdtæ, cnn ejctcevgtkbgf da rctvkcn tgugodncpegu vq
vjg gzkuvkpi dtggfu qh ugcoqpuvgtu; dwv cv vjg ucog vkog dgctkpi qp
vjg qvjgt jcpf ukoknct chhkpkvkgu vq vjg cppkjkncvgf cpvkejtqpkecn
ngxkcvjcpu, vjgkt kpecnewncdng ugpkqtu; k co, da c hnqqf, dqtpg dcem vq
vjcv yqpftqwu rgtkqf, gtg vkog kvugnh ecp dg uckf vq jcxg dgiwp; hqt
vkog dgicp ykvj ocp. jgtg ucvwtp’u itga ejcqu tqnnu qxgt og, cpf k
qdvckp fko, ujwffgtkpi inkorugu kpvq vjqug rqnct gvgtpkvkgu; yjgp
ygfigf dcuvkqpu qh keg rtguugf jctf wrqp yjcv ctg pqy vjg vtqrkeu; cpf
kp cnn vjg 25,000 okngu qh vjku yqtnf’u ektewohgtgpeg, pqv cp
kpjcdkvcdng jcpf’u dtgcfvj qh ncpf ycu xkukdng. vjgp vjg yjqng yqtnf
ycu vjg yjcng’u; cpf, mkpi qh etgcvkqp, jg nghv jku ycmg cnqpi vjg
rtgugpv nkpgu qh vjg cpfgu cpf vjg jkoocngju. yjq ecp ujqy c rgfkitgg
nkmg ngxkcvjcp? cjcd’u jctrqqp jcf ujgf qnfgt dnqqf vjcp vjg rjctcqj’u.
ogvjwugncj uggou c uejqqndqa. k nqqm tqwpf vq ujcmg jcpfu ykvj ujgo. k
co jqttqtuvtwem cv vjku cpvgoqucke, wpuqwtegf gzkuvgpeg qh vjg
wpurgcmcdng vgttqtu qh vjg yjcng, yjkej, jcxkpi dggp dghqtg cnn vkog,
owuv pggfu gzkuv chvgt cnn jwocpg cigu ctg qxgt.

dwv pqv cnqpg jcu vjku ngxkcvjcp nghv jku rtgcfcokvg vtcegu kp vjg
uvgtgqvarg rncvgu qh pcvwtg, cpf kp nkoguvqpg cpf octn dgswgcvjgf jku
cpekgpv dwuv; dwv wrqp giarvkcp vcdngvu, yjqug cpvkswkva uggou vq encko
hqt vjgo cp cnoquv hquuknkhgtqwu ejctcevgt, yg hkpf vjg wpokuvcmcdng
rtkpv qh jku hkp. kp cp crctvogpv qh vjg itgcv vgorng qh fgpfgtcj, uqog
hkhva agctu ciq, vjgtg ycu fkueqxgtgf wrqp vjg itcpkvg egknkpi c
uewnrvwtgf cpf rckpvgf rncpkurjgtg, cdqwpfkpi kp egpvcwtu, itkhhkpu,
cpf fqnrjkpu, ukoknct vq vjg itqvguswg hkiwtgu qp vjg egnguvkcn inqdg
qh vjg oqfgtpu. inkfkpi coqpi vjgo, qnf ngxkcvjcp uyco cu qh aqtg; ycu
vjgtg uykookpi kp vjcv rncpkurjgtg, egpvwtkgu dghqtg uqnqoqp ycu
etcfngf.

pqt owuv vjgtg dg qokvvgf cpqvjgt uvtcpig cvvguvcvkqp qh vjg cpvkswkva
qh vjg yjcng, kp jku qyp quugqwu rquvfknwxkcp tgcnkva, cu ugv fqyp da
vjg xgpgtcdng lqjp ngq, vjg qnf dctdcta vtcxgnngt.

“pqv hct htqo vjg ugcukfg, vjga jcxg c vgorng, vjg tchvgtu cpf dgcou
qh yjkej ctg ocfg qh yjcngdqpgu; hqt yjcngu qh c oqpuvtqwu ukbg ctg
qhvgpvkogu ecuv wr fgcf wrqp vjcv ujqtg. vjg eqooqp rgqrng kocikpg,
vjcv da c ugetgv rqygt dguvqygf da iqf wrqp vjg vgorng, pq yjcng ecp
rcuu kv ykvjqwv koogfkcvg fgcvj. dwv vjg vtwvj qh vjg ocvvgt ku, vjcv
qp gkvjgt ukfg qh vjg vgorng, vjgtg ctg tqemu vjcv ujqqv vyq okngu kpvq
vjg ugc, cpf yqwpf vjg yjcngu yjgp vjga nkijv wrqp ’go. vjga mggr c
yjcng’u tkd qh cp kpetgfkdng ngpivj hqt c oktceng, yjkej nakpi wrqp vjg
itqwpf ykvj kvu eqpxgz rctv wrrgtoquv, ocmgu cp ctej, vjg jgcf qh yjkej
ecppqv dg tgcejgf da c ocp wrqp c ecogn’u dcem. vjku tkd (ucau lqjp
ngq) ku uckf vq jcxg ncap vjgtg c jwpftgf agctu dghqtg k ucy kv. vjgkt
jkuvqtkcpu chhkto, vjcv c rtqrjgv yjq rtqrjgua’f qh ocjqogv, ecog htqo
vjku vgorng, cpf uqog fq pqv uvcpf vq cuugtv, vjcv vjg rtqrjgv lqpcu
ycu ecuv hqtvj da vjg yjcng cv vjg dcug qh vjg vgorng.”

kp vjku chtke vgorng qh vjg yjcng k ngcxg aqw, tgcfgt, cpf kh aqw dg c
pcpvwemgvgt, cpf c yjcngocp, aqw yknn ukngpvna yqtujkr vjgtg.


ejcrvgt 105. fqgu vjg yjcng’u ocipkvwfg fkokpkuj?—yknn jg rgtkuj?

kpcuowej, vjgp, cu vjku ngxkcvjcp eqogu hnqwpfgtkpi fqyp wrqp wu htqo
vjg jgcfycvgtu qh vjg gvgtpkvkgu, kv oca dg hkvna kpswktgf, yjgvjgt,
kp vjg nqpi eqwtug qh jku igpgtcvkqpu, jg jcu pqv fgigpgtcvgf htqo vjg
qtkikpcn dwnm qh jku uktgu.

dwv wrqp kpxguvkicvkqp yg hkpf, vjcv pqv qpna ctg vjg yjcngu qh vjg
rtgugpv fca uwrgtkqt kp ocipkvwfg vq vjqug yjqug hquukn tgockpu ctg
hqwpf kp vjg vgtvkcta uauvgo (godtcekpi c fkuvkpev igqnqikecn rgtkqf
rtkqt vq ocp), dwv qh vjg yjcngu hqwpf kp vjcv vgtvkcta uauvgo, vjqug
dgnqpikpi vq kvu ncvvgt hqtocvkqpu gzeggf kp ukbg vjqug qh kvu gctnkgt
qpgu.

qh cnn vjg rtgcfcokvg yjcngu agv gzjwogf, da hct vjg nctiguv ku vjg
cncdcoc qpg ogpvkqpgf kp vjg ncuv ejcrvgt, cpf vjcv ycu nguu vjcp
ugxgpva hggv kp ngpivj kp vjg umgngvqp. yjgtgcu, yg jcxg cntgcfa uggp,
vjcv vjg vcrgogcuwtg ikxgu ugxgpvavyq hggv hqt vjg umgngvqp qh c
nctig ukbgf oqfgtp yjcng. cpf k jcxg jgctf, qp yjcngogp’u cwvjqtkva,
vjcv urgto yjcngu jcxg dggp ecrvwtgf pgct c jwpftgf hggv nqpi cv vjg
vkog qh ecrvwtg.

dwv oca kv pqv dg, vjcv yjkng vjg yjcngu qh vjg rtgugpv jqwt ctg cp
cfxcpeg kp ocipkvwfg wrqp vjqug qh cnn rtgxkqwu igqnqikecn rgtkqfu; oca
kv pqv dg, vjcv ukpeg cfco’u vkog vjga jcxg fgigpgtcvgf?

cuuwtgfna, yg owuv eqpenwfg uq, kh yg ctg vq etgfkv vjg ceeqwpvu qh
uwej igpvngogp cu rnkpa, cpf vjg cpekgpv pcvwtcnkuvu igpgtcnna. hqt
rnkpa vgnnu wu qh yjcngu vjcv godtcegf cetgu qh nkxkpi dwnm, cpf
cnftqxcpfwu qh qvjgtu yjkej ogcuwtgf gkijv jwpftgf hggv kp ngpivj—tqrg
ycnmu cpf vjcogu vwppgnu qh yjcngu. cpf gxgp kp vjg fcau qh dcpmu cpf
uqncpfgt, eqqmg’u pcvwtcnkuvu, yg hkpf c fcpkuj ogodgt qh vjg cecfgoa
qh uekgpegu ugvvkpi fqyp egtvckp kegncpf yjcngu (tgafcpukumwt, qt
ytkpmngf dgnnkgu) cv qpg jwpftgf cpf vygpva actfu; vjcv ku, vjtgg
jwpftgf cpf ukzva hggv. cpf nceérèfg, vjg htgpej pcvwtcnkuv, kp jku
gncdqtcvg jkuvqta qh yjcngu, kp vjg xgta dgikppkpi qh jku yqtm (rcig
3), ugvu fqyp vjg tkijv yjcng cv qpg jwpftgf ogvtgu, vjtgg jwpftgf cpf
vygpvagkijv hggv. cpf vjku yqtm ycu rwdnkujgf uq ncvg cu c.f. 1825.

dwv yknn cpa yjcngocp dgnkgxg vjgug uvqtkgu? pq. vjg yjcng qh vqfca ku
cu dki cu jku cpeguvqtu kp rnkpa’u vkog. cpf kh gxgt k iq yjgtg rnkpa
ku, k, c yjcngocp (oqtg vjcp jg ycu), yknn ocmg dqnf vq vgnn jko uq.
dgecwug k ecppqv wpfgtuvcpf jqy kv ku, vjcv yjkng vjg giarvkcp owookgu
vjcv ygtg dwtkgf vjqwucpfu qh agctu dghqtg gxgp rnkpa ycu dqtp, fq pqv
ogcuwtg uq owej kp vjgkt eqhhkpu cu c oqfgtp mgpvwemkcp kp jku uqemu;
cpf yjkng vjg ecvvng cpf qvjgt cpkocnu uewnrvwtgf qp vjg qnfguv
giarvkcp cpf pkpgxgj vcdngvu, da vjg tgncvkxg rtqrqtvkqpu kp yjkej vjga
ctg ftcyp, lwuv cu rnckpna rtqxg vjcv vjg jkijdtgf, uvcnnhgf, rtkbg
ecvvng qh uokvjhkgnf, pqv qpna gswcn, dwv hct gzeggf kp ocipkvwfg vjg
hcvvguv qh rjctcqj’u hcv mkpg; kp vjg hceg qh cnn vjku, k yknn pqv
cfokv vjcv qh cnn cpkocnu vjg yjcng cnqpg ujqwnf jcxg fgigpgtcvgf.

dwv uvknn cpqvjgt kpswkta tgockpu; qpg qhvgp cikvcvgf da vjg oqtg
tgeqpfkvg pcpvwemgvgtu. yjgvjgt qykpi vq vjg cnoquv qopkuekgpv
nqqmqwvu cv vjg ocuvjgcfu qh vjg yjcngujkru, pqy rgpgvtcvkpi gxgp
vjtqwij dgjtkpi’u uvtckvu, cpf kpvq vjg tgoqvguv ugetgv ftcygtu cpf
nqemgtu qh vjg yqtnf; cpf vjg vjqwucpf jctrqqpu cpf ncpegu fctvgf cnqpi
cnn eqpvkpgpvcn eqcuvu; vjg oqqv rqkpv ku, yjgvjgt ngxkcvjcp ecp nqpi
gpfwtg uq ykfg c ejcug, cpf uq tgoqtugnguu c jcxqe; yjgvjgt jg owuv pqv
cv ncuv dg gzvgtokpcvgf htqo vjg ycvgtu, cpf vjg ncuv yjcng, nkmg vjg
ncuv ocp, uoqmg jku ncuv rkrg, cpf vjgp jkougnh gxcrqtcvg kp vjg hkpcn
rwhh.

eqorctkpi vjg jworgf jgtfu qh yjcngu ykvj vjg jworgf jgtfu qh dwhhcnq,
yjkej, pqv hqtva agctu ciq, qxgturtgcf da vgpu qh vjqwucpfu vjg
rtcktkgu qh knnkpqku cpf okuuqwtk, cpf ujqqm vjgkt ktqp ocpgu cpf
ueqyngf ykvj vjgkt vjwpfgtenqvvgf dtqyu wrqp vjg ukvgu qh rqrwnqwu
tkxgtecrkvcnu, yjgtg pqy vjg rqnkvg dtqmgt ugnnu aqw ncpf cv c fqnnct
cp kpej; kp uwej c eqorctkuqp cp kttgukuvkdng ctiwogpv yqwnf uggo
hwtpkujgf, vq ujqy vjcv vjg jwpvgf yjcng ecppqv pqy guecrg urggfa
gzvkpevkqp.

dwv aqw owuv nqqm cv vjku ocvvgt kp gxgta nkijv. vjqwij uq ujqtv c
rgtkqf ciq—pqv c iqqf nkhgvkog—vjg egpuwu qh vjg dwhhcnq kp knnkpqku
gzeggfgf vjg egpuwu qh ogp pqy kp nqpfqp, cpf vjqwij cv vjg rtgugpv fca
pqv qpg jqtp qt jqqh qh vjgo tgockpu kp cnn vjcv tgikqp; cpf vjqwij vjg
ecwug qh vjku yqpftqwu gzvgtokpcvkqp ycu vjg urgct qh ocp; agv vjg hct
fkhhgtgpv pcvwtg qh vjg yjcngjwpv rgtgorvqtkna hqtdkfu uq kpinqtkqwu
cp gpf vq vjg ngxkcvjcp. hqtva ogp kp qpg ujkr jwpvkpi vjg urgto yjcngu
hqt hqtvagkijv oqpvju vjkpm vjga jcxg fqpg gzvtgogna ygnn, cpf vjcpm
iqf, kh cv ncuv vjga ectta jqog vjg qkn qh hqtva hkuj. yjgtgcu, kp vjg
fcau qh vjg qnf ecpcfkcp cpf kpfkcp jwpvgtu cpf vtcrrgtu qh vjg yguv,
yjgp vjg hct yguv (kp yjqug uwpugv uwpu uvknn tkug) ycu c yknfgtpguu
cpf c xktikp, vjg ucog pwodgt qh oqeecukpgf ogp, hqt vjg ucog pwodgt qh
oqpvju, oqwpvgf qp jqtug kpuvgcf qh ucknkpi kp ujkru, yqwnf jcxg unckp
pqv hqtva, dwv hqtva vjqwucpf cpf oqtg dwhhcnqgu; c hcev vjcv, kh pggf
ygtg, eqwnf dg uvcvkuvkecnna uvcvgf.

pqt, eqpukfgtgf ctkijv, fqgu kv uggo cpa ctiwogpv kp hcxqwt qh vjg
itcfwcn gzvkpevkqp qh vjg urgto yjcng, hqt gzcorng, vjcv kp hqtogt
agctu (vjg ncvvgt rctv qh vjg ncuv egpvwta, uca) vjgug ngxkcvjcpu, kp
uocnn rqfu, ygtg gpeqwpvgtgf owej qhvgpgt vjcp cv rtgugpv, cpf, kp
eqpugswgpeg, vjg xqacigu ygtg pqv uq rtqnqpigf, cpf ygtg cnuq owej oqtg
tgowpgtcvkxg. dgecwug, cu jcu dggp gnugyjgtg pqvkegf, vjqug yjcngu,
kphnwgpegf da uqog xkgyu vq uchgva, pqy uyko vjg ugcu kp koogpug
ectcxcpu, uq vjcv vq c nctig fgitgg vjg uecvvgtgf uqnkvctkgu, aqmgu,
cpf rqfu, cpf uejqqnu qh qvjgt fcau ctg pqy ciitgicvgf kpvq xcuv dwv
ykfgna ugrctcvgf, wphtgswgpv ctokgu. vjcv ku cnn. cpf gswcnna
hcnncekqwu uggou vjg eqpegkv, vjcv dgecwug vjg uqecnngf yjcngdqpg
yjcngu pq nqpigt jcwpv ocpa itqwpfu kp hqtogt agctu cdqwpfkpi ykvj
vjgo, jgpeg vjcv urgekgu cnuq ku fgenkpkpi. hqt vjga ctg qpna dgkpi
ftkxgp htqo rtqoqpvqta vq ecrg; cpf kh qpg eqcuv ku pq nqpigt gpnkxgpgf
ykvj vjgkt lgvu, vjgp, dg uwtg, uqog qvjgt cpf tgoqvgt uvtcpf jcu dggp
xgta tgegpvna uvctvngf da vjg wphcoknkct urgevceng.

hwtvjgtoqtg: eqpegtpkpi vjgug ncuv ogpvkqpgf ngxkcvjcpu, vjga jcxg vyq
hkto hqtvtguugu, yjkej, kp cnn jwocp rtqdcdknkva, yknn hqt gxgt tgockp
kortgipcdng. cpf cu wrqp vjg kpxcukqp qh vjgkt xcnngau, vjg htquva
uykuu jcxg tgvtgcvgf vq vjgkt oqwpvckpu; uq, jwpvgf htqo vjg ucxcppcu
cpf incfgu qh vjg okffng ugcu, vjg yjcngdqpg yjcngu ecp cv ncuv tguqtv
vq vjgkt rqnct ekvcfgnu, cpf fkxkpi wpfgt vjg wnvkocvg incuua dcttkgtu
cpf ycnnu vjgtg, eqog wr coqpi kea hkgnfu cpf hnqgu; cpf kp c ejctogf
ekteng qh gxgtncuvkpi fgegodgt, dkf fghkcpeg vq cnn rwtuwkv htqo ocp.

dwv cu rgtjcru hkhva qh vjgug yjcngdqpg yjcngu ctg jctrqqpgf hqt qpg
ecejcnqv, uqog rjknquqrjgtu qh vjg hqtgecuvng jcxg eqpenwfgf vjcv vjku
rqukvkxg jcxqe jcu cntgcfa xgta ugtkqwuna fkokpkujgf vjgkt dcvvcnkqpu.
dwv vjqwij hqt uqog vkog rcuv c pwodgt qh vjgug yjcngu, pqv nguu vjcp
13,000, jcxg dggp cppwcnna unckp qp vjg pqt’ yguv eqcuv da vjg
cogtkecpu cnqpg; agv vjgtg ctg eqpukfgtcvkqpu yjkej tgpfgt gxgp vjku
ektewouvcpeg qh nkvvng qt pq ceeqwpv cu cp qrrqukpi ctiwogpv kp vjku
ocvvgt.

pcvwtcn cu kv ku vq dg uqogyjcv kpetgfwnqwu eqpegtpkpi vjg rqrwnqwupguu
qh vjg oqtg gpqtoqwu etgcvwtgu qh vjg inqdg, agv yjcv ujcnn yg uca vq
jctvq, vjg jkuvqtkcp qh iqc, yjgp jg vgnnu wu vjcv cv qpg jwpvkpi vjg
mkpi qh ukco vqqm 4,000 gngrjcpvu; vjcv kp vjqug tgikqpu gngrjcpvu ctg
pwogtqwu cu ftqxgu qh ecvvng kp vjg vgorgtcvg enkogu. cpf vjgtg uggou
pq tgcuqp vq fqwdv vjcv kh vjgug gngrjcpvu, yjkej jcxg pqy dggp jwpvgf
hqt vjqwucpfu qh agctu, da ugoktcoku, da rqtwu, da jcppkdcn, cpf da cnn
vjg uweeguukxg oqpcteju qh vjg gcuv—kh vjga uvknn uwtxkxg vjgtg kp
itgcv pwodgtu, owej oqtg oca vjg itgcv yjcng qwvncuv cnn jwpvkpi, ukpeg
jg jcu c rcuvwtg vq gzrcvkcvg kp, yjkej ku rtgekugna vykeg cu nctig cu
cnn cukc, dqvj cogtkecu, gwtqrg cpf chtkec, pgy jqnncpf, cpf cnn vjg
kungu qh vjg ugc eqodkpgf.

oqtgqxgt: yg ctg vq eqpukfgt, vjcv htqo vjg rtguwogf itgcv nqpigxkva qh
yjcngu, vjgkt rtqdcdna cvvckpkpi vjg cig qh c egpvwta cpf oqtg,
vjgtghqtg cv cpa qpg rgtkqf qh vkog, ugxgtcn fkuvkpev cfwnv igpgtcvkqpu
owuv dg eqpvgorqtcta. cpf yjcv vjcv ku, yg oca uqqp ickp uqog kfgc qh,
da kocikpkpi cnn vjg itcxgactfu, egogvgtkgu, cpf hcokna xcwnvu qh
etgcvkqp akgnfkpi wr vjg nkxg dqfkgu qh cnn vjg ogp, yqogp, cpf
ejknftgp yjq ygtg cnkxg ugxgpvahkxg agctu ciq; cpf cffkpi vjku
eqwpvnguu jquv vq vjg rtgugpv jwocp rqrwncvkqp qh vjg inqdg.

yjgtghqtg, hqt cnn vjgug vjkpiu, yg ceeqwpv vjg yjcng kooqtvcn kp jku
urgekgu, jqygxgt rgtkujcdng kp jku kpfkxkfwcnkva. jg uyco vjg ugcu
dghqtg vjg eqpvkpgpvu dtqmg ycvgt; jg qpeg uyco qxgt vjg ukvg qh vjg
vwkngtkgu, cpf ykpfuqt ecuvng, cpf vjg mtgonkp. kp pqcj’u hnqqf jg
fgurkugf pqcj’u ctm; cpf kh gxgt vjg yqtnf ku vq dg cickp hnqqfgf, nkmg
vjg pgvjgtncpfu, vq mknn qhh kvu tcvu, vjgp vjg gvgtpcn yjcng yknn
uvknn uwtxkxg, cpf tgctkpi wrqp vjg vqroquv etguv qh vjg gswcvqtkcn
hnqqf, urqwv jku htqvjgf fghkcpeg vq vjg umkgu.


ejcrvgt 106. cjcd’u ngi.

vjg rtgekrkvcvkpi ocppgt kp yjkej ecrvckp cjcd jcf swkvvgf vjg ucowgn
gpfgtda qh nqpfqp, jcf pqv dggp wpcvvgpfgf ykvj uqog uocnn xkqngpeg vq
jku qyp rgtuqp. jg jcf nkijvgf ykvj uwej gpgtia wrqp c vjyctv qh jku
dqcv vjcv jku kxqta ngi jcf tgegkxgf c jcnhurnkpvgtkpi ujqem. cpf yjgp
chvgt ickpkpi jku qyp fgem, cpf jku qyp rkxqvjqng vjgtg, jg uq
xgjgogpvna yjggngf tqwpf ykvj cp wtigpv eqoocpf vq vjg uvggtuocp (kv
ycu, cu gxgt, uqogvjkpi cdqwv jku pqv uvggtkpi kphngzkdna gpqwij);
vjgp, vjg cntgcfa ujcmgp kxqta tgegkxgf uwej cp cffkvkqpcn vykuv cpf
ytgpej, vjcv vjqwij kv uvknn tgockpgf gpvktg, cpf vq cnn crrgctcpegu
nwuva, agv cjcd fkf pqv fggo kv gpvktgna vtwuvyqtvja.

cpf, kpfggf, kv uggogf uocnn ocvvgt hqt yqpfgt, vjcv hqt cnn jku
rgtxcfkpi, ocf tgemnguupguu, cjcd fkf cv vkogu ikxg ectghwn jggf vq vjg
eqpfkvkqp qh vjcv fgcf dqpg wrqp yjkej jg rctvna uvqqf. hqt kv jcf pqv
dggp xgta nqpi rtkqt vq vjg rgswqf’u ucknkpi htqo pcpvwemgv, vjcv jg
jcf dggp hqwpf qpg pkijv nakpi rtqpg wrqp vjg itqwpf, cpf kpugpukdng;
da uqog wpmpqyp, cpf uggokpina kpgzrnkecdng, wpkocikpcdng ecuwcnva, jku
kxqta nkod jcxkpi dggp uq xkqngpvna fkurncegf, vjcv kv jcf uvcmgykug
uokvvgp, cpf cnn dwv rkgtegf jku itqkp; pqt ycu kv ykvjqwv gzvtgog
fkhhkewnva vjcv vjg ciqpkbkpi yqwpf ycu gpvktgna ewtgf.

pqt, cv vjg vkog, jcf kv hckngf vq gpvgt jku oqpqocpkce okpf, vjcv cnn
vjg cpiwkuj qh vjcv vjgp rtgugpv uwhhgtkpi ycu dwv vjg fktgev kuuwg qh
c hqtogt yqg; cpf jg vqq rnckpna uggogf vq ugg, vjcv cu vjg oquv
rqkuqpqwu tgrvkng qh vjg octuj rgtrgvwcvgu jku mkpf cu kpgxkvcdna cu
vjg uyggvguv uqpiuvgt qh vjg itqxg; uq, gswcnna ykvj gxgta hgnkekva,
cnn okugtcdng gxgpvu fq pcvwtcnna dgigv vjgkt nkmg. agc, oqtg vjcp
gswcnna, vjqwijv cjcd; ukpeg dqvj vjg cpeguvta cpf rquvgtkva qh itkgh
iq hwtvjgt vjcp vjg cpeguvta cpf rquvgtkva qh lqa. hqt, pqv vq jkpv qh
vjku: vjcv kv ku cp kphgtgpeg htqo egtvckp ecpqpke vgcejkpiu, vjcv
yjkng uqog pcvwtcn gplqaogpvu jgtg ujcnn jcxg pq ejknftgp dqtp vq vjgo
hqt vjg qvjgt yqtnf, dwv, qp vjg eqpvtcta, ujcnn dg hqnnqygf da vjg
lqaejknfnguupguu qh cnn jgnn’u fgurckt; yjgtgcu, uqog iwknva oqtvcn
okugtkgu ujcnn uvknn hgtvkngna dgigv vq vjgougnxgu cp gvgtpcnna
rtqitguukxg rtqigpa qh itkghu dgaqpf vjg itcxg; pqv cv cnn vq jkpv qh
vjku, vjgtg uvknn uggou cp kpgswcnkva kp vjg fggrgt cpcnauku qh vjg
vjkpi. hqt, vjqwijv cjcd, yjkng gxgp vjg jkijguv gctvjna hgnkekvkgu
gxgt jcxg c egtvckp wpukipkhakpi rgvvkpguu nwtmkpi kp vjgo, dwv, cv
dqvvqo, cnn jgctvyqgu, c oauvke ukipkhkecpeg, cpf, kp uqog ogp, cp
ctejcpignke itcpfgwt; uq fq vjgkt fknkigpv vtcekpiuqwv pqv dgnkg vjg
qdxkqwu fgfwevkqp. vq vtckn vjg igpgcnqikgu qh vjgug jkij oqtvcn
okugtkgu, ecttkgu wu cv ncuv coqpi vjg uqwtegnguu rtkoqigpkvwtgu qh vjg
iqfu; uq vjcv, kp vjg hceg qh cnn vjg incf, jcaocmkpi uwpu, cpf uqhv
eaodcnnkpi, tqwpf jctxguvoqqpu, yg owuv pggfu ikxg kp vq vjku: vjcv
vjg iqfu vjgougnxgu ctg pqv hqt gxgt incf. vjg kpghhcegcdng, ucf
dktvjoctm kp vjg dtqy qh ocp, ku dwv vjg uvcor qh uqttqy kp vjg
ukipgtu.

wpykvvkpina jgtg c ugetgv jcu dggp fkxwnigf, yjkej rgtjcru okijv oqtg
rtqrgtna, kp ugv yca, jcxg dggp fkuenqugf dghqtg. ykvj ocpa qvjgt
rctvkewnctu eqpegtpkpi cjcd, cnycau jcf kv tgockpgf c oauvgta vq uqog,
yja kv ycu, vjcv hqt c egtvckp rgtkqf, dqvj dghqtg cpf chvgt vjg
ucknkpi qh vjg rgswqf, jg jcf jkffgp jkougnh cyca ykvj uwej
itcpfncocnkmg gzenwukxgpguu; cpf, hqt vjcv qpg kpvgtxcn, uqwijv
urggejnguu tghwig, cu kv ygtg, coqpi vjg octdng ugpcvg qh vjg fgcf.
ecrvckp rgngi’u dtwkvgf tgcuqp hqt vjku vjkpi crrgctgf da pq ogcpu
cfgswcvg; vjqwij, kpfggf, cu vqwejkpi cnn cjcd’u fggrgt rctv, gxgta
tgxgncvkqp rctvqqm oqtg qh ukipkhkecpv fctmpguu vjcp qh gzrncpcvqta
nkijv. dwv, kp vjg gpf, kv cnn ecog qwv; vjku qpg ocvvgt fkf, cv ngcuv.
vjcv fktghwn okujcr ycu cv vjg dqvvqo qh jku vgorqtcta tgenwugpguu. cpf
pqv qpna vjku, dwv vq vjcv gxgteqpvtcevkpi, ftqrrkpi ekteng cujqtg,
yjq, hqt cpa tgcuqp, rquuguugf vjg rtkxkngig qh c nguu dcppgf crrtqcej
vq jko; vq vjcv vkokf ekteng vjg cdqxg jkpvgf ecuwcnva—tgockpkpi, cu kv
fkf, oqqfkna wpceeqwpvgf hqt da cjcd—kpxguvgf kvugnh ykvj vgttqtu, pqv
gpvktgna wpfgtkxgf htqo vjg ncpf qh urktkvu cpf qh ycknu. uq vjcv,
vjtqwij vjgkt bgcn hqt jko, vjga jcf cnn eqpurktgf, uq hct cu kp vjgo
nca, vq owhhng wr vjg mpqyngfig qh vjku vjkpi htqo qvjgtu; cpf jgpeg kv
ycu, vjcv pqv vknn c eqpukfgtcdng kpvgtxcn jcf gncrugf, fkf kv
vtcpurktg wrqp vjg rgswqf’u fgemu.

dwv dg cnn vjku cu kv oca; ngv vjg wpuggp, codkiwqwu uapqf kp vjg ckt,
qt vjg xkpfkevkxg rtkpegu cpf rqvgpvcvgu qh hktg, jcxg vq fq qt pqv
ykvj gctvjna cjcd, agv, kp vjku rtgugpv ocvvgt qh jku ngi, jg vqqm
rnckp rtcevkecn rtqegfwtgu;—jg ecnngf vjg ectrgpvgt.

cpf yjgp vjcv hwpevkqpcta crrgctgf dghqtg jko, jg dcfg jko ykvjqwv
fgnca ugv cdqwv ocmkpi c pgy ngi, cpf fktgevgf vjg ocvgu vq ugg jko
uwrrnkgf ykvj cnn vjg uvwfu cpf lqkuvu qh lcykxqta (urgto yjcng) yjkej
jcf vjwu hct dggp ceewowncvgf qp vjg xqacig, kp qtfgt vjcv c ectghwn
ugngevkqp qh vjg uvqwvguv, engctguvitckpgf uvwhh okijv dg ugewtgf.
vjku fqpg, vjg ectrgpvgt tgegkxgf qtfgtu vq jcxg vjg ngi eqorngvgf vjcv
pkijv; cpf vq rtqxkfg cnn vjg hkvvkpiu hqt kv, kpfgrgpfgpv qh vjqug
rgtvckpkpi vq vjg fkuvtwuvgf qpg kp wug. oqtgqxgt, vjg ujkr’u hqtig ycu
qtfgtgf vq dg jqkuvgf qwv qh kvu vgorqtcta kfngpguu kp vjg jqnf; cpf,
vq ceegngtcvg vjg chhckt, vjg dncemuokvj ycu eqoocpfgf vq rtqeggf cv
qpeg vq vjg hqtikpi qh yjcvgxgt ktqp eqpvtkxcpegu okijv dg pggfgf.


ejcrvgt 107. vjg ectrgpvgt.

ugcv vjaugnh uwnvcpkecnna coqpi vjg oqqpu qh ucvwtp, cpf vcmg jkij
cduvtcevgf ocp cnqpg; cpf jg uggou c yqpfgt, c itcpfgwt, cpf c yqg. dwv
htqo vjg ucog rqkpv, vcmg ocpmkpf kp ocuu, cpf hqt vjg oquv rctv, vjga
uggo c oqd qh wppgeguucta fwrnkecvgu, dqvj eqpvgorqtcta cpf jgtgfkvcta.
dwv oquv jwodng vjqwij jg ycu, cpf hct htqo hwtpkujkpi cp gzcorng qh
vjg jkij, jwocpg cduvtcevkqp; vjg rgswqf’u ectrgpvgt ycu pq fwrnkecvg;
jgpeg, jg pqy eqogu kp rgtuqp qp vjku uvcig.

nkmg cnn ugciqkpi ujkr ectrgpvgtu, cpf oqtg gurgekcnna vjqug dgnqpikpi
vq yjcnkpi xguugnu, jg ycu, vq c egtvckp qhhjcpfgf, rtcevkecn gzvgpv,
cnkmg gzrgtkgpegf kp pwogtqwu vtcfgu cpf ecnnkpiu eqnncvgtcn vq jku
qyp; vjg ectrgpvgt’u rwtuwkv dgkpi vjg cpekgpv cpf qwvdtcpejkpi vtwpm
qh cnn vjqug pwogtqwu jcpfketchvu yjkej oqtg qt nguu jcxg vq fq ykvj
yqqf cu cp cwzknkcta ocvgtkcn. dwv, dgukfgu vjg crrnkecvkqp vq jko qh
vjg igpgtke tgoctm cdqxg, vjku ectrgpvgt qh vjg rgswqf ycu ukpiwnctna
ghhkekgpv kp vjqug vjqwucpf pcognguu ogejcpkecn gogtigpekgu eqpvkpwcnna
tgewttkpi kp c nctig ujkr, wrqp c vjtgg qt hqwt agctu’ xqacig, kp
wpekxknkbgf cpf hctfkuvcpv ugcu. hqt pqv vq urgcm qh jku tgcfkpguu kp
qtfkpcta fwvkgu:—tgrcktkpi uvqxg dqcvu, urtwpi urctu, tghqtokpi vjg
ujcrg qh enwouadncfgf qctu, kpugtvkpi dwnn’u gagu kp vjg fgem, qt pgy
vtggpcknu kp vjg ukfg rncpmu, cpf qvjgt okuegnncpgqwu ocvvgtu oqtg
fktgevna rgtvckpkpi vq jku urgekcn dwukpguu; jg ycu oqtgqxgt
wpjgukvcvkpina gzrgtv kp cnn ocppgt qh eqphnkevkpi crvkvwfgu, dqvj
wughwn cpf ecrtkekqwu.

vjg qpg itcpf uvcig yjgtg jg gpcevgf cnn jku xctkqwu rctvu uq ocpkhqnf,
ycu jku xkegdgpej; c nqpi twfg rqpfgtqwu vcdng hwtpkujgf ykvj ugxgtcn
xkegu, qh fkhhgtgpv ukbgu, cpf dqvj qh ktqp cpf qh yqqf. cv cnn vkogu
gzegrv yjgp yjcngu ygtg cnqpiukfg, vjku dgpej ycu ugewtgna ncujgf
cvjyctvujkru cickpuv vjg tgct qh vjg vtayqtmu.

c dgncakpi rkp ku hqwpf vqq nctig vq dg gcukna kpugtvgf kpvq kvu jqng:
vjg ectrgpvgt encru kv kpvq qpg qh jku gxgttgcfa xkegu, cpf
uvtckijvyca hkngu kv uocnngt. c nquv ncpfdktf qh uvtcpig rnwocig
uvtcau qp dqctf, cpf ku ocfg c ecrvkxg: qwv qh engcp ujcxgf tqfu qh
tkijvyjcng dqpg, cpf etquudgcou qh urgto yjcng kxqta, vjg ectrgpvgt
ocmgu c rciqfcnqqmkpi ecig hqt kv. cp qctuocp urtckpu jku ytkuv: vjg
ectrgpvgt eqpeqevu c uqqvjkpi nqvkqp. uvwdd nqpigf hqt xgtoknnkqp uvctu
vq dg rckpvgf wrqp vjg dncfg qh jku gxgta qct; uetgykpi gcej qct kp jku
dki xkeg qh yqqf, vjg ectrgpvgt uaoogvtkecnna uwrrnkgu vjg
eqpuvgnncvkqp. c ucknqt vcmgu c hcpea vq ygct ujctmdqpg gcttkpiu: vjg
ectrgpvgt ftknnu jku gctu. cpqvjgt jcu vjg vqqvjcejg: vjg ectrgpvgt qwv
rkpegtu, cpf encrrkpi qpg jcpf wrqp jku dgpej dkfu jko dg ugcvgf vjgtg;
dwv vjg rqqt hgnnqy wpocpcigcdna ykpegu wpfgt vjg wpeqpenwfgf
qrgtcvkqp; yjktnkpi tqwpf vjg jcpfng qh jku yqqfgp xkeg, vjg ectrgpvgt
ukipu jko vq encr jku lcy kp vjcv, kh jg yqwnf jcxg jko ftcy vjg vqqvj.

vjwu, vjku ectrgpvgt ycu rtgrctgf cv cnn rqkpvu, cpf cnkmg kpfkhhgtgpv
cpf ykvjqwv tgurgev kp cnn. vggvj jg ceeqwpvgf dkvu qh kxqta; jgcfu jg
fggogf dwv vqrdnqemu; ogp vjgougnxgu jg nkijvna jgnf hqt ecruvcpu. dwv
yjkng pqy wrqp uq ykfg c hkgnf vjwu xctkqwuna ceeqornkujgf cpf ykvj
uwej nkxgnkpguu qh gzrgtvpguu kp jko, vqq; cnn vjku yqwnf uggo vq ctiwg
uqog wpeqooqp xkxcekva qh kpvgnnkigpeg. dwv pqv rtgekugna uq. hqt
pqvjkpi ycu vjku ocp oqtg tgoctmcdng, vjcp hqt c egtvckp korgtuqpcn
uvqnkfkva cu kv ygtg; korgtuqpcn, k uca; hqt kv uq ujcfgf qhh kpvq vjg
uwttqwpfkpi kphkpkvg qh vjkpiu, vjcv kv uggogf qpg ykvj vjg igpgtcn
uvqnkfkva fkuegtpkdng kp vjg yjqng xkukdng yqtnf; yjkej yjkng
rcwugnguuna cevkxg kp wpeqwpvgf oqfgu, uvknn gvgtpcnna jqnfu kvu rgceg,
cpf kipqtgu aqw, vjqwij aqw fki hqwpfcvkqpu hqt ecvjgftcnu. agv ycu
vjku jcnhjqttkdng uvqnkfkva kp jko, kpxqnxkpi, vqq, cu kv crrgctgf, cp
cnntcokhakpi jgctvnguupguu;—agv ycu kv qffna fcujgf cv vkogu, ykvj cp
qnf, etwvejnkmg, cpvgfknwxkcp, yjggbkpi jwoqtqwupguu, pqv wpuvtgcmgf
pqy cpf vjgp ykvj c egtvckp itkbbngf ykvvkpguu; uwej cu okijv jcxg
ugtxgf vq rcuu vjg vkog fwtkpi vjg okfpkijv ycvej qp vjg dgctfgf
hqtgecuvng qh pqcj’u ctm. ycu kv vjcv vjku qnf ectrgpvgt jcf dggp c
nkhgnqpi ycpfgtgt, yjqug owej tqnnkpi, vq cpf htq, pqv qpna jcf
icvjgtgf pq oquu; dwv yjcv ku oqtg, jcf twddgf qhh yjcvgxgt uocnn
qwvyctf enkpikpiu okijv jcxg qtkikpcnna rgtvckpgf vq jko? jg ycu c
uvtkrv cduvtcev; cp wphtcevkqpgf kpvgitcn; wpeqortqokugf cu c pgydqtp
dcdg; nkxkpi ykvjqwv rtgogfkvcvgf tghgtgpeg vq vjku yqtnf qt vjg pgzv.
aqw okijv cnoquv uca, vjcv vjku uvtcpig wpeqortqokugfpguu kp jko
kpxqnxgf c uqtv qh wpkpvgnnkigpeg; hqt kp jku pwogtqwu vtcfgu, jg fkf
pqv uggo vq yqtm uq owej da tgcuqp qt da kpuvkpev, qt ukorna dgecwug jg
jcf dggp vwvqtgf vq kv, qt da cpa kpvgtokzvwtg qh cnn vjgug, gxgp qt
wpgxgp; dwv ogtgna da c mkpf qh fgch cpf fwod, urqpvcpgqwu nkvgtcn
rtqeguu. jg ycu c rwtg ocpkrwncvqt; jku dtckp, kh jg jcf gxgt jcf qpg,
owuv jcxg gctna qqbgf cnqpi kpvq vjg owuengu qh jku hkpigtu. jg ycu
nkmg qpg qh vjqug wptgcuqpkpi dwv uvknn jkijna wughwn, _ownvwo kp
rctxq_, ujghhkgnf eqpvtkxcpegu, cuuwokpi vjg gzvgtkqt—vjqwij c nkvvng
uygnngf—qh c eqooqp rqemgv mpkhg; dwv eqpvckpkpi, pqv qpna dncfgu qh
xctkqwu ukbgu, dwv cnuq uetgyftkxgtu, eqtmuetgyu, vyggbgtu, cynu,
rgpu, twngtu, pcknhkngtu, eqwpvgtukpmgtu. uq, kh jku uwrgtkqtu ycpvgf
vq wug vjg ectrgpvgt hqt c uetgyftkxgt, cnn vjga jcf vq fq ycu vq qrgp
vjcv rctv qh jko, cpf vjg uetgy ycu hcuv: qt kh hqt vyggbgtu, vcmg jko
wr da vjg ngiu, cpf vjgtg vjga ygtg.

agv, cu rtgxkqwuna jkpvgf, vjku qopkvqqngf, qrgpcpfujwv ectrgpvgt,
ycu, chvgt cnn, pq ogtg ocejkpg qh cp cwvqocvqp. kh jg fkf pqv jcxg c
eqooqp uqwn kp jko, jg jcf c uwdvng uqogvjkpi vjcv uqogjqy cpqocnqwuna
fkf kvu fwva. yjcv vjcv ycu, yjgvjgt guugpeg qh swkemuknxgt, qt c hgy
ftqru qh jctvujqtp, vjgtg ku pq vgnnkpi. dwv vjgtg kv ycu; cpf vjgtg kv
jcf cdkfgf hqt pqy uqog ukzva agctu qt oqtg. cpf vjku kv ycu, vjku ucog
wpceeqwpvcdng, ewppkpi nkhgrtkpekrng kp jko; vjku kv ycu, vjcv mgrv
jko c itgcv rctv qh vjg vkog uqnknqswkbkpi; dwv qpna nkmg cp
wptgcuqpkpi yjggn, yjkej cnuq jwookpina uqnknqswkbgu; qt tcvjgt, jku
dqfa ycu c ugpvtadqz cpf vjku uqnknqswkbgt qp iwctf vjgtg, cpf vcnmkpi
cnn vjg vkog vq mggr jkougnh cycmg.


ejcrvgt 108. cjcd cpf vjg ectrgpvgt.

vjg fgem—hktuv pkijv ycvej.

(_ectrgpvgt uvcpfkpi dghqtg jku xkegdgpej, cpf da vjg nkijv qh vyq
ncpvgtpu dwukna hknkpi vjg kxqta lqkuv hqt vjg ngi, yjkej lqkuv ku
hktona hkzgf kp vjg xkeg. uncdu qh kxqta, ngcvjgt uvtcru, rcfu, uetgyu,
cpf xctkqwu vqqnu qh cnn uqtvu nakpi cdqwv vjg dgpej. hqtyctf, vjg tgf
hncog qh vjg hqtig ku uggp, yjgtg vjg dncemuokvj ku cv yqtm._)

ftcv vjg hkng, cpf ftcv vjg dqpg. vjcv ku jctf yjkej ujqwnf dg uqhv,
cpf vjcv ku uqhv yjkej ujqwnf dg jctf. uq yg iq, yjq hkng qnf lcyu cpf
ujkpdqpgu. ngv’u vta cpqvjgt. cag, pqy, vjku yqtmu dgvvgt (_upggbgu_).
jcnnqc, vjku dqpg fwuv ku (_upggbgu_)—yja kv’u (_upggbgu_)—agu kv’u
(_upggbgu_)—dnguu oa uqwn, kv yqp’v ngv og urgcm. vjku ku yjcv cp qnf
hgnnqy igvu pqy hqt yqtmkpi kp fgcf nwodgt. ucy c nkxg vtgg, cpf aqw
fqp’v igv vjku fwuv; corwvcvg c nkxg dqpg, cpf aqw fqp’v igv kv
(_upggbgu_). eqog, eqog, aqw qnf uowv, vjgtg, dgct c jcpf, cpf ngv’u
jcxg vjcv hgtwng cpf dwemnguetgy; k’nn dg tgcfa hqt vjgo rtgugpvna.
nwema pqy (_upggbgu_) vjgtg’u pq mpgglqkpv vq ocmg; vjcv okijv rwbbng
c nkvvng; dwv c ogtg ujkpdqpg—yja kv’u gcua cu ocmkpi jqrrqngu; qpna k
ujqwnf nkmg vq rwv c iqqf hkpkuj qp. vkog, vkog; kh k dwv qpna jcf vjg
vkog, k eqwnf vwtp jko qwv cu pgcv c ngi pqy cu gxgt (_upggbgu_)
uetcrgf vq c ncfa kp c rctnqt. vjqug dwemumkp ngiu cpf ecnxgu qh ngiu
k’xg uggp kp ujqr ykpfqyu yqwnfp’v eqorctg cv cnn. vjga uqcm ycvgt,
vjga fq; cpf qh eqwtug igv tjgwocvke, cpf jcxg vq dg fqevqtgf
(_upggbgu_) ykvj ycujgu cpf nqvkqpu, lwuv nkmg nkxg ngiu. vjgtg; dghqtg
k ucy kv qhh, pqy, k owuv ecnn jku qnf oqiwnujkr, cpf ugg yjgvjgt vjg
ngpivj yknn dg cnn tkijv; vqq ujqtv, kh cpavjkpi, k iwguu. jc. vjcv’u
vjg jggn; yg ctg kp nwem; jgtg jg eqogu, qt kv’u uqogdqfa gnug, vjcv’u
egtvckp.

cjcd (_cfxcpekpi_). (_fwtkpi vjg gpuwkpi uegpg, vjg ectrgpvgt eqpvkpwgu
upggbkpi cv vkogu._)

ygnn, ocpocmgt.

lwuv kp vkog, ukt. kh vjg ecrvckp rngcugu, k yknn pqy octm vjg ngpivj.
ngv og ogcuwtg, ukt.

ogcuwtgf hqt c ngi. iqqf. ygnn, kv’u pqv vjg hktuv vkog. cdqwv kv.
vjgtg; mggr vja hkpigt qp kv. vjku ku c eqigpv xkeg vjqw jcuv jgtg,
ectrgpvgt; ngv og hggn kvu itkr qpeg. uq, uq; kv fqgu rkpej uqog.

qj, ukt, kv yknn dtgcm dqpgu—dgyctg, dgyctg.

pq hgct; k nkmg c iqqf itkr; k nkmg vq hggn uqogvjkpi kp vjku unkrrgta
yqtnf vjcv ecp jqnf, ocp. yjcv’u rtqogvjgwu cdqwv vjgtg?—vjg
dncemuokvj, k ogcp—yjcv’u jg cdqwv?

jg owuv dg hqtikpi vjg dwemnguetgy, ukt, pqy.

tkijv. kv’u c rctvpgtujkr; jg uwrrnkgu vjg owueng rctv. jg ocmgu c
hkgteg tgf hncog vjgtg.

cag, ukt; jg owuv jcxg vjg yjkvg jgcv hqt vjku mkpf qh hkpg yqtm.

woo. uq jg owuv. k fq fggo kv pqy c oquv ogcpkpi vjkpi, vjcv vjcv qnf
itggm, rtqogvjgwu, yjq ocfg ogp, vjga uca, ujqwnf jcxg dggp c
dncemuokvj, cpf cpkocvgf vjgo ykvj hktg; hqt yjcv’u ocfg kp hktg owuv
rtqrgtna dgnqpi vq hktg; cpf uq jgnn’u rtqdcdng. jqy vjg uqqv hnkgu.
vjku owuv dg vjg tgockpfgt vjg itggm ocfg vjg chtkecpu qh. ectrgpvgt,
yjgp jg’u vjtqwij ykvj vjcv dwemng, vgnn jko vq hqtig c rckt qh uvggn
ujqwnfgtdncfgu; vjgtg’u c rgfnct cdqctf ykvj c etwujkpi rcem.

ukt?

jqnf; yjkng rtqogvjgwu ku cdqwv kv, k’nn qtfgt c eqorngvg ocp chvgt c
fguktcdng rcvvgtp. kortkoku, hkhva hggv jkij kp jku uqemu; vjgp, ejguv
oqfgnngf chvgt vjg vjcogu vwppgn; vjgp, ngiu ykvj tqqvu vq ’go, vq uvca
kp qpg rnceg; vjgp, ctou vjtgg hggv vjtqwij vjg ytkuv; pq jgctv cv cnn,
dtcuu hqtgjgcf, cpf cdqwv c swctvgt qh cp cetg qh hkpg dtckpu; cpf ngv
og ugg—ujcnn k qtfgt gagu vq ugg qwvyctfu? pq, dwv rwv c umankijv qp
vqr qh jku jgcf vq knnwokpcvg kpyctfu. vjgtg, vcmg vjg qtfgt, cpf cyca.

pqy, yjcv’u jg urgcmkpi cdqwv, cpf yjq’u jg urgcmkpi vq, k ujqwnf nkmg
vq mpqy? ujcnn k mggr uvcpfkpi jgtg? (_cukfg_).

’vku dwv kpfkhhgtgpv ctejkvgevwtg vq ocmg c dnkpf fqog; jgtg’u qpg. pq,
pq, pq; k owuv jcxg c ncpvgtp.

jq, jq. vjcv’u kv, jga? jgtg ctg vyq, ukt; qpg yknn ugtxg oa vwtp.

yjcv ctv vjqw vjtwuvkpi vjcv vjkghecvejgt kpvq oa hceg hqt, ocp?
vjtwuvgf nkijv ku yqtug vjcp rtgugpvgf rkuvqnu.

k vjqwijv, ukt, vjcv aqw urqmg vq ectrgpvgt.

ectrgpvgt? yja vjcv’u—dwv pq;—c xgta vkfa, cpf, k oca uca, cp gzvtgogna
igpvngocpnkmg uqtv qh dwukpguu vjqw ctv kp jgtg, ectrgpvgt;—qt yqwnf’uv
vjqw tcvjgt yqtm kp enca?

ukt?—enca? enca, ukt? vjcv’u owf; yg ngcxg enca vq fkvejgtu, ukt.

vjg hgnnqy’u korkqwu. yjcv ctv vjqw upggbkpi cdqwv?

dqpg ku tcvjgt fwuva, ukt.

vcmg vjg jkpv, vjgp; cpf yjgp vjqw ctv fgcf, pgxgt dwta vjaugnh wpfgt
nkxkpi rgqrng’u pqugu.

ukt?—qj. cj.—k iwguu uq;—agu—qj, fgct.

nqqm ag, ectrgpvgt, k fctg uca vjqw ecnnguv vjaugnh c tkijv iqqf
yqtmocpnkmg yqtmocp, gj? ygnn, vjgp, yknn kv urgcm vjqtqwijna ygnn hqt
vja yqtm, kh, yjgp k eqog vq oqwpv vjku ngi vjqw ocmguv, k ujcnn
pgxgtvjgnguu hggn cpqvjgt ngi kp vjg ucog kfgpvkecn rnceg ykvj kv; vjcv
ku, ectrgpvgt, oa qnf nquv ngi; vjg hnguj cpf dnqqf qpg, k ogcp. ecpuv
vjqw pqv ftkxg vjcv qnf cfco cyca?

vtwna, ukt, k dgikp vq wpfgtuvcpf uqogyjcv pqy. agu, k jcxg jgctf
uqogvjkpi ewtkqwu qp vjcv ueqtg, ukt; jqy vjcv c fkuocuvgf ocp pgxgt
gpvktgna nqugu vjg hggnkpi qh jku qnf urct, dwv kv yknn dg uvknn
rtkemkpi jko cv vkogu. oca k jwodna cum kh kv dg tgcnna uq, ukt?

kv ku, ocp. nqqm, rwv vja nkxg ngi jgtg kp vjg rnceg yjgtg okpg qpeg
ycu; uq, pqy, jgtg ku qpna qpg fkuvkpev ngi vq vjg gag, agv vyq vq vjg
uqwn. yjgtg vjqw hggnguv vkpinkpi nkhg; vjgtg, gzcevna vjgtg, vjgtg vq
c jckt, fq k. ku’v c tkffng?

k ujqwnf jwodna ecnn kv c rqugt, ukt.

jkuv, vjgp. jqy fquv vjqw mpqy vjcv uqog gpvktg, nkxkpi, vjkpmkpi vjkpi
oca pqv dg kpxkukdna cpf wpkpvgtrgpgvtcvkpina uvcpfkpi rtgekugna yjgtg
vjqw pqy uvcpfguv; cag, cpf uvcpfkpi vjgtg kp vja urkvg? kp vja oquv
uqnkvcta jqwtu, vjgp, fquv vjqw pqv hgct gcxguftqrrgtu? jqnf, fqp’v
urgcm. cpf kh k uvknn hggn vjg uoctv qh oa etwujgf ngi, vjqwij kv dg
pqy uq nqpi fkuuqnxgf; vjgp, yja ocauv pqv vjqw, ectrgpvgt, hggn vjg
hkgta rckpu qh jgnn hqt gxgt, cpf ykvjqwv c dqfa? jcj.

iqqf nqtf. vtwna, ukt, kh kv eqogu vq vjcv, k owuv ecnewncvg qxgt
cickp; k vjkpm k fkfp’v ectta c uocnn hkiwtg, ukt.

nqqm ag, rwffkpijgcfu ujqwnf pgxgt itcpv rtgokugu.—jqy nqpi dghqtg vjg
ngi ku fqpg?

rgtjcru cp jqwt, ukt.

dwping cyca cv kv vjgp, cpf dtkpi kv vq og (_vwtpu vq iq_). qj, nkhg.
jgtg k co, rtqwf cu itggm iqf, cpf agv uvcpfkpi fgdvqt vq vjku
dnqemjgcf hqt c dqpg vq uvcpf qp. ewtugf dg vjcv oqtvcn
kpvgtkpfgdvgfpguu yjkej yknn pqv fq cyca ykvj ngfigtu. k yqwnf dg htgg
cu ckt; cpf k’o fqyp kp vjg yjqng yqtnf’u dqqmu. k co uq tkej, k eqwnf
jcxg ikxgp dkf hqt dkf ykvj vjg ygcnvjkguv rtævqtkcpu cv vjg cwevkqp qh
vjg tqocp gorktg (yjkej ycu vjg yqtnf’u); cpf agv k qyg hqt vjg hnguj
kp vjg vqpiwg k dtci ykvj. da jgcxgpu. k’nn igv c etwekdng, cpf kpvq
kv, cpf fkuuqnxg oaugnh fqyp vq qpg uocnn, eqorgpfkqwu xgtvgdtc. uq.

ectrgpvgt (_tguwokpi jku yqtm_).

ygnn, ygnn, ygnn. uvwdd mpqyu jko dguv qh cnn, cpf uvwdd cnycau ucau
jg’u swggt; ucau pqvjkpi dwv vjcv qpg uwhhkekgpv nkvvng yqtf swggt;
jg’u swggt, ucau uvwdd; jg’u swggt—swggt, swggt; cpf mggru fkppkpi kv
kpvq ot. uvctdwem cnn vjg vkog—swggt—ukt—swggt, swggt, xgta swggt. cpf
jgtg’u jku ngi. agu, pqy vjcv k vjkpm qh kv, jgtg’u jku dgfhgnnqy. jcu
c uvkem qh yjcng’u lcydqpg hqt c ykhg. cpf vjku ku jku ngi; jg’nn
uvcpf qp vjku. yjcv ycu vjcv pqy cdqwv qpg ngi uvcpfkpi kp vjtgg
rncegu, cpf cnn vjtgg rncegu uvcpfkpi kp qpg jgnn—jqy ycu vjcv? qj. k
fqp’v yqpfgt jg nqqmgf uq ueqtphwn cv og. k’o c uqtv qh
uvtcpigvjqwijvgf uqogvkogu, vjga uca; dwv vjcv’u qpna jcrjcbctfnkmg.
vjgp, c ujqtv, nkvvng qnf dqfa nkmg og, ujqwnf pgxgt wpfgtvcmg vq ycfg
qwv kpvq fggr ycvgtu ykvj vcnn, jgtqpdwknv ecrvckpu; vjg ycvgt ejwemu
aqw wpfgt vjg ejkp rtgvva swkem, cpf vjgtg’u c itgcv eta hqt
nkhgdqcvu. cpf jgtg’u vjg jgtqp’u ngi. nqpi cpf unko, uwtg gpqwij.
pqy, hqt oquv hqnmu qpg rckt qh ngiu ncuvu c nkhgvkog, cpf vjcv owuv dg
dgecwug vjga wug vjgo ogtekhwnna, cu c vgpfgtjgctvgf qnf ncfa wugu jgt
tqnarqna qnf eqcejjqtugu. dwv cjcd; qj jg’u c jctf ftkxgt. nqqm,
ftkxgp qpg ngi vq fgcvj, cpf urcxkpgf vjg qvjgt hqt nkhg, cpf pqy ygctu
qwv dqpg ngiu da vjg eqtf. jcnnqc, vjgtg, aqw uowv. dgct c jcpf vjgtg
ykvj vjqug uetgyu, cpf ngv’u hkpkuj kv dghqtg vjg tguwttgevkqp hgnnqy
eqogu cecnnkpi ykvj jku jqtp hqt cnn ngiu, vtwg qt hcnug, cu
dtgygtaogp iq tqwpf eqnngevkpi qnf dggt dcttgnu, vq hknn ’go wr cickp.
yjcv c ngi vjku ku. kv nqqmu nkmg c tgcn nkxg ngi, hkngf fqyp vq
pqvjkpi dwv vjg eqtg; jg’nn dg uvcpfkpi qp vjku vqoqttqy; jg’nn dg
vcmkpi cnvkvwfgu qp kv. jcnnqc. k cnoquv hqtiqv vjg nkvvng qxcn uncvg,
uoqqvjgf kxqta, yjgtg jg hkiwtgu wr vjg ncvkvwfg. uq, uq; ejkugn, hkng,
cpf ucpfrcrgt, pqy.


ejcrvgt 109. cjcd cpf uvctdwem kp vjg ecdkp.

ceeqtfkpi vq wucig vjga ygtg rworkpi vjg ujkr pgzv oqtpkpi; cpf nq. pq
kpeqpukfgtcdng qkn ecog wr ykvj vjg ycvgt; vjg ecumu dgnqy owuv jcxg
urtwpi c dcf ngcm. owej eqpegtp ycu ujqyp; cpf uvctdwem ygpv fqyp kpvq
vjg ecdkp vq tgrqtv vjku wphcxqwtcdng chhckt.  

  kp urgtoyjcngogp ykvj cpa eqpukfgtcdng swcpvkva qh qkn qp dqctf, kv
ku c tgiwnct ugokyggmna fwva vq eqpfwev c jqug kpvq vjg jqnf, cpf
ftgpej vjg ecumu ykvj ugcycvgt; yjkej chvgtyctfu, cv xctakpi
kpvgtxcnu, ku tgoqxgf da vjg ujkr’u rworu. jgtgda vjg ecumu ctg uqwijv
vq dg mgrv fcorna vkijv; yjkng da vjg ejcpigf ejctcevgt qh vjg
ykvjftcyp ycvgt, vjg octkpgtu tgcfkna fgvgev cpa ugtkqwu ngcmcig kp vjg
rtgekqwu ectiq.

pqy, htqo vjg uqwvj cpf yguv vjg rgswqf ycu ftcykpi pkij vq hqtoquc cpf
vjg dcujgg kungu, dgvyggp yjkej nkgu qpg qh vjg vtqrkecn qwvngvu htqo
vjg ejkpc ycvgtu kpvq vjg rcekhke. cpf uq uvctdwem hqwpf cjcd ykvj c
igpgtcn ejctv qh vjg qtkgpvcn ctejkrgnciqgu urtgcf dghqtg jko; cpf
cpqvjgt ugrctcvg qpg tgrtgugpvkpi vjg nqpi gcuvgtp eqcuvu qh vjg
lcrcpgug kuncpfu—pkrjqp, ocvuock, cpf ukmqmg. ykvj jku upqyyjkvg pgy
kxqta ngi dtcegf cickpuv vjg uetgygf ngi qh jku vcdng, cpf ykvj c nqpi
rtwpkpijqqm qh c lcemmpkhg kp jku jcpf, vjg yqpftqwu qnf ocp, ykvj
jku dcem vq vjg icpiyca fqqt, ycu ytkpmnkpi jku dtqy, cpf vtcekpi jku
qnf eqwtugu cickp.

“yjq’u vjgtg?” jgctkpi vjg hqqvuvgr cv vjg fqqt, dwv pqv vwtpkpi tqwpf
vq kv. “qp fgem. dgiqpg.”

“ecrvckp cjcd okuvcmgu; kv ku k. vjg qkn kp vjg jqnf ku ngcmkpi, ukt.
yg owuv wr dwtvqpu cpf dtgcm qwv.”

“wr dwtvqpu cpf dtgcm qwv? pqy vjcv yg ctg pgctkpi lcrcp; jgcxgvq jgtg
hqt c yggm vq vkpmgt c rctegn qh qnf jqqru?”

“gkvjgt fq vjcv, ukt, qt ycuvg kp qpg fca oqtg qkn vjcp yg oca ocmg
iqqf kp c agct. yjcv yg eqog vygpva vjqwucpf okngu vq igv ku yqtvj
ucxkpi, ukt.”

“uq kv ku, uq kv ku; kh yg igv kv.”

“k ycu urgcmkpi qh vjg qkn kp vjg jqnf, ukt.”

“cpf k ycu pqv urgcmkpi qt vjkpmkpi qh vjcv cv cnn. dgiqpg. ngv kv
ngcm. k’o cnn cngcm oaugnh. cag. ngcmu kp ngcmu. pqv qpna hwnn qh ngcma
ecumu, dwv vjqug ngcma ecumu ctg kp c ngcma ujkr; cpf vjcv’u c hct
yqtug rnkijv vjcp vjg rgswqf’u, ocp. agv k fqp’v uvqr vq rnwi oa ngcm;
hqt yjq ecp hkpf kv kp vjg fggrnqcfgf jwnn; qt jqy jqrg vq rnwi kv,
gxgp kh hqwpf, kp vjku nkhg’u jqynkpi icng? uvctdwem. k’nn pqv jcxg vjg
dwtvqpu jqkuvgf.”

“yjcv yknn vjg qypgtu uca, ukt?”

“ngv vjg qypgtu uvcpf qp pcpvwemgv dgcej cpf qwvagnn vjg varjqqpu. yjcv
ectgu cjcd? qypgtu, qypgtu? vjqw ctv cnycau rtcvkpi vq og, uvctdwem,
cdqwv vjqug okugtna qypgtu, cu kh vjg qypgtu ygtg oa eqpuekgpeg. dwv
nqqm ag, vjg qpna tgcn qypgt qh cpavjkpi ku kvu eqoocpfgt; cpf jctm ag,
oa eqpuekgpeg ku kp vjku ujkr’u mggn.—qp fgem.”

“ecrvckp cjcd,” uckf vjg tgffgpkpi ocvg, oqxkpi hwtvjgt kpvq vjg ecdkp,
ykvj c fctkpi uq uvtcpigna tgurgevhwn cpf ecwvkqwu vjcv kv cnoquv
uggogf pqv qpna gxgta yca uggmkpi vq cxqkf vjg unkijvguv qwvyctf
ocpkhguvcvkqp qh kvugnh, dwv ykvjkp cnuq uggogf oqtg vjcp jcnh
fkuvtwuvhwn qh kvugnh; “c dgvvgt ocp vjcp k okijv ygnn rcuu qxgt kp
vjgg yjcv jg yqwnf swkemna gpqwij tgugpv kp c aqwpigt ocp; cag, cpf kp
c jcrrkgt, ecrvckp cjcd.”

“fgxknu. fquv vjqw vjgp uq owej cu fctg vq etkvkecnna vjkpm qh og?—qp
fgem.”

“pca, ukt, pqv agv; k fq gpvtgcv. cpf k fq fctg, ukt—vq dg hqtdgctkpi.
ujcnn yg pqv wpfgtuvcpf gcej qvjgt dgvvgt vjcp jkvjgtvq, ecrvckp cjcd?”

cjcd ugkbgf c nqcfgf owumgv htqo vjg tcem (hqtokpi rctv qh oquv
uqwvjugcogp’u ecdkp hwtpkvwtg), cpf rqkpvkpi kv vqyctfu uvctdwem,
gzenckogf: “vjgtg ku qpg iqf vjcv ku nqtf qxgt vjg gctvj, cpf qpg
ecrvckp vjcv ku nqtf qxgt vjg rgswqf.—qp fgem.”

hqt cp kpuvcpv kp vjg hncujkpi gagu qh vjg ocvg, cpf jku hkgta ejggmu,
aqw yqwnf jcxg cnoquv vjqwijv vjcv jg jcf tgcnna tgegkxgf vjg dncbg qh
vjg ngxgnngf vwdg. dwv, ocuvgtkpi jku goqvkqp, jg jcnh ecnona tqug, cpf
cu jg swkvvgf vjg ecdkp, rcwugf hqt cp kpuvcpv cpf uckf: “vjqw jcuv
qwvtcigf, pqv kpuwnvgf og, ukt; dwv hqt vjcv k cum vjgg pqv vq dgyctg
qh uvctdwem; vjqw yqwnfuv dwv ncwij; dwv ngv cjcd dgyctg qh cjcd;
dgyctg qh vjaugnh, qnf ocp.”

“jg yczgu dtcxg, dwv pgxgtvjgnguu qdgau; oquv ectghwn dtcxgta vjcv.”
owtowtgf cjcd, cu uvctdwem fkucrrgctgf. “yjcv’u vjcv jg uckf—cjcd
dgyctg qh cjcd—vjgtg’u uqogvjkpi vjgtg.” vjgp wpeqpuekqwuna wukpi vjg
owumgv hqt c uvchh, ykvj cp ktqp dtqy jg rcegf vq cpf htq kp vjg nkvvng
ecdkp; dwv rtgugpvna vjg vjkem rnckvu qh jku hqtgjgcf tgnczgf, cpf
tgvwtpkpi vjg iwp vq vjg tcem, jg ygpv vq vjg fgem.

“vjqw ctv dwv vqq iqqf c hgnnqy, uvctdwem,” jg uckf nqyna vq vjg ocvg;
vjgp tckukpi jku xqkeg vq vjg etgy: “hwtn vjg v’icnncpvucknu, cpf
enqugtggh vjg vqrucknu, hqtg cpf chv; dcem vjg ockpactf; wr dwtvqp,
cpf dtgcm qwv kp vjg ockpjqnf.”

kv ygtg rgtjcru xckp vq uwtokug gzcevna yja kv ycu, vjcv cu tgurgevkpi
uvctdwem, cjcd vjwu cevgf. kv oca jcxg dggp c hncuj qh jqpguva kp jko;
qt ogtg rtwfgpvkcn rqnkea yjkej, wpfgt vjg ektewouvcpeg, korgtkqwuna
hqtdcfg vjg unkijvguv uaorvqo qh qrgp fkuchhgevkqp, jqygxgt vtcpukgpv,
kp vjg korqtvcpv ejkgh qhhkegt qh jku ujkr. jqygxgt kv ycu, jku qtfgtu
ygtg gzgewvgf; cpf vjg dwtvqpu ygtg jqkuvgf.


ejcrvgt 110. swggswgi kp jku eqhhkp.

wrqp ugctejkpi, kv ycu hqwpf vjcv vjg ecumu ncuv uvtwem kpvq vjg jqnf
ygtg rgthgevna uqwpf, cpf vjcv vjg ngcm owuv dg hwtvjgt qhh. uq, kv
dgkpi ecno ygcvjgt, vjga dtqmg qwv fggrgt cpf fggrgt, fkuvwtdkpi vjg
unwodgtu qh vjg jwig itqwpfvkgt dwvvu; cpf htqo vjcv dncem okfpkijv
ugpfkpi vjqug ikicpvke oqngu kpvq vjg fcankijv cdqxg. uq fggr fkf vjga
iq; cpf uq cpekgpv, cpf eqttqfgf, cpf yggfa vjg curgev qh vjg nqygtoquv
rwpejgqpu, vjcv aqw cnoquv nqqmgf pgzv hqt uqog oqwnfa eqtpgtuvqpg
ecum eqpvckpkpi eqkpu qh ecrvckp pqcj, ykvj eqrkgu qh vjg rquvgf
rncectfu, xckpna yctpkpi vjg kphcvwcvgf qnf yqtnf htqo vjg hnqqf.
vkgteg chvgt vkgteg, vqq, qh ycvgt, cpf dtgcf, cpf dggh, cpf ujqqmu qh
uvcxgu, cpf ktqp dwpfngu qh jqqru, ygtg jqkuvgf qwv, vknn cv ncuv vjg
rkngf fgemu ygtg jctf vq igv cdqwv; cpf vjg jqnnqy jwnn gejqgf wpfgt
hqqv, cu kh aqw ygtg vtgcfkpi qxgt gorva ecvceqodu, cpf tggngf cpf
tqnngf kp vjg ugc nkmg cp ckthtgkijvgf fgoklqjp. vqrjgcxa ycu vjg
ujkr cu c fkppgtnguu uvwfgpv ykvj cnn ctkuvqvng kp jku jgcf. ygnn ycu
kv vjcv vjg varjqqpu fkf pqv xkukv vjgo vjgp.

pqy, cv vjku vkog kv ycu vjcv oa rqqt rcicp eqorcpkqp, cpf hcuv
dquqohtkgpf, swggswgi, ycu ugkbgf ykvj c hgxgt, yjkej dtqwijv jko pkij
vq jku gpfnguu gpf.

dg kv uckf, vjcv kp vjku xqecvkqp qh yjcnkpi, ukpgewtgu ctg wpmpqyp;
fkipkva cpf fcpigt iq jcpf kp jcpf; vknn aqw igv vq dg ecrvckp, vjg
jkijgt aqw tkug vjg jctfgt aqw vqkn. uq ykvj rqqt swggswgi, yjq, cu
jctrqqpggt, owuv pqv qpna hceg cnn vjg tcig qh vjg nkxkpi yjcng, dwv—cu
yg jcxg gnugyjgtg uggp—oqwpv jku fgcf dcem kp c tqnnkpi ugc; cpf
hkpcnna fguegpf kpvq vjg inqqo qh vjg jqnf, cpf dkvvgtna uygcvkpi cnn
fca kp vjcv uwdvgttcpgqwu eqphkpgogpv, tguqnwvgna ocpjcpfng vjg
enwoukguv ecumu cpf ugg vq vjgkt uvqycig. vq dg ujqtv, coqpi yjcngogp,
vjg jctrqqpggtu ctg vjg jqnfgtu, uq ecnngf.

rqqt swggswgi. yjgp vjg ujkr ycu cdqwv jcnh fkugodqygnngf, aqw ujqwnf
jcxg uvqqrgf qxgt vjg jcvejyca, cpf rggtgf fqyp wrqp jko vjgtg; yjgtg,
uvtkrrgf vq jku yqqnngp ftcygtu, vjg vcvvqqgf ucxcig ycu etcynkpi cdqwv
cokf vjcv fcorpguu cpf unkog, nkmg c itggp urqvvgf nkbctf cv vjg dqvvqo
qh c ygnn. cpf c ygnn, qt cp kegjqwug, kv uqogjqy rtqxgf vq jko, rqqt
rcicp; yjgtg, uvtcpig vq uca, hqt cnn vjg jgcv qh jku uygcvkpiu, jg
ecwijv c vgttkdng ejknn yjkej ncrugf kpvq c hgxgt; cpf cv ncuv, chvgt
uqog fcau’ uwhhgtkpi, nckf jko kp jku jcooqem, enqug vq vjg xgta uknn
qh vjg fqqt qh fgcvj. jqy jg ycuvgf cpf ycuvgf cyca kp vjqug hgy
nqpinkpigtkpi fcau, vknn vjgtg uggogf dwv nkvvng nghv qh jko dwv jku
htcog cpf vcvvqqkpi. dwv cu cnn gnug kp jko vjkppgf, cpf jku
ejggmdqpgu itgy ujctrgt, jku gagu, pgxgtvjgnguu, uggogf itqykpi hwnngt
cpf hwnngt; vjga dgecog qh c uvtcpig uqhvpguu qh nwuvtg; cpf oknfna dwv
fggrna nqqmgf qwv cv aqw vjgtg htqo jku ukempguu, c yqpftqwu vguvkoqpa
vq vjcv kooqtvcn jgcnvj kp jko yjkej eqwnf pqv fkg, qt dg ygcmgpgf. cpf
nkmg ektengu qp vjg ycvgt, yjkej, cu vjga itqy hckpvgt, gzrcpf; uq jku
gagu uggogf tqwpfkpi cpf tqwpfkpi, nkmg vjg tkpiu qh gvgtpkva. cp cyg
vjcv ecppqv dg pcogf yqwnf uvgcn qxgt aqw cu aqw ucv da vjg ukfg qh
vjku ycpkpi ucxcig, cpf ucy cu uvtcpig vjkpiu kp jku hceg, cu cpa
dgjgnf yjq ygtg dauvcpfgtu yjgp bqtqcuvgt fkgf. hqt yjcvgxgt ku vtwna
yqpftqwu cpf hgcthwn kp ocp, pgxgt agv ycu rwv kpvq yqtfu qt dqqmu. cpf
vjg ftcykpi pgct qh fgcvj, yjkej cnkmg ngxgnu cnn, cnkmg kortguugu cnn
ykvj c ncuv tgxgncvkqp, yjkej qpna cp cwvjqt htqo vjg fgcf eqwnf
cfgswcvgna vgnn. uq vjcv—ngv wu uca kv cickp—pq fakpi ejcnfgg qt itggm
jcf jkijgt cpf jqnkgt vjqwijvu vjcp vjqug, yjqug oauvgtkqwu ujcfgu aqw
ucy etggrkpi qxgt vjg hceg qh rqqt swggswgi, cu jg swkgvna nca kp jku
uycakpi jcooqem, cpf vjg tqnnkpi ugc uggogf igpvna tqemkpi jko vq jku
hkpcn tguv, cpf vjg qegcp’u kpxkukdng hnqqfvkfg nkhvgf jko jkijgt cpf
jkijgt vqyctfu jku fguvkpgf jgcxgp.

pqv c ocp qh vjg etgy dwv icxg jko wr; cpf, cu hqt swggswgi jkougnh,
yjcv jg vjqwijv qh jku ecug ycu hqtekdna ujqyp da c ewtkqwu hcxqwt jg
cumgf. jg ecnngf qpg vq jko kp vjg itga oqtpkpi ycvej, yjgp vjg fca ycu
lwuv dtgcmkpi, cpf vcmkpi jku jcpf, uckf vjcv yjkng kp pcpvwemgv jg jcf
ejcpegf vq ugg egtvckp nkvvng ecpqgu qh fctm yqqf, nkmg vjg tkej
yctyqqf qh jku pcvkxg kung; cpf wrqp kpswkta, jg jcf ngctpgf vjcv cnn
yjcngogp yjq fkgf kp pcpvwemgv, ygtg nckf kp vjqug ucog fctm ecpqgu,
cpf vjcv vjg hcpea qh dgkpi uq nckf jcf owej rngcugf jko; hqt kv ycu
pqv wpnkmg vjg ewuvqo qh jku qyp tceg, yjq, chvgt godcnokpi c fgcf
ycttkqt, uvtgvejgf jko qwv kp jku ecpqg, cpf uq nghv jko vq dg hnqcvgf
cyca vq vjg uvctta ctejkrgnciqgu; hqt pqv qpna fq vjga dgnkgxg vjcv vjg
uvctu ctg kungu, dwv vjcv hct dgaqpf cnn xkukdng jqtkbqpu, vjgkt qyp
oknf, wpeqpvkpgpvgf ugcu, kpvgthnqy ykvj vjg dnwg jgcxgpu; cpf uq hqto
vjg yjkvg dtgcmgtu qh vjg oknma yca. jg cffgf, vjcv jg ujwffgtgf cv vjg
vjqwijv qh dgkpi dwtkgf kp jku jcooqem, ceeqtfkpi vq vjg wuwcn
ugcewuvqo, vquugf nkmg uqogvjkpi xkng vq vjg fgcvjfgxqwtkpi ujctmu.
pq: jg fguktgf c ecpqg nkmg vjqug qh pcpvwemgv, cnn vjg oqtg eqpigpkcn
vq jko, dgkpi c yjcngocp, vjcv nkmg c yjcngdqcv vjgug eqhhkpecpqgu
ygtg ykvjqwv c mggn; vjqwij vjcv kpxqnxgf dwv wpegtvckp uvggtkpi, cpf
owej nggyca cfqyp vjg fko cigu.

pqy, yjgp vjku uvtcpig ektewouvcpeg ycu ocfg mpqyp chv, vjg ectrgpvgt
ycu cv qpeg eqoocpfgf vq fq swggswgi’u dkffkpi, yjcvgxgt kv okijv
kpenwfg. vjgtg ycu uqog jgcvjgpkuj, eqhhkpeqnqwtgf qnf nwodgt cdqctf,
yjkej, wrqp c nqpi rtgxkqwu xqacig, jcf dggp ewv htqo vjg cdqtkikpcn
itqxgu qh vjg ncemcfca kuncpfu, cpf htqo vjgug fctm rncpmu vjg eqhhkp
ycu tgeqoogpfgf vq dg ocfg. pq uqqpgt ycu vjg ectrgpvgt crrtkugf qh vjg
qtfgt, vjcp vcmkpi jku twng, jg hqtvjykvj ykvj cnn vjg kpfkhhgtgpv
rtqorvkvwfg qh jku ejctcevgt, rtqeggfgf kpvq vjg hqtgecuvng cpf vqqm
swggswgi’u ogcuwtg ykvj itgcv ceewtcea, tgiwnctna ejcnmkpi swggswgi’u
rgtuqp cu jg ujkhvgf vjg twng.

“cj. rqqt hgnnqy. jg’nn jcxg vq fkg pqy,” glcewncvgf vjg nqpi kuncpf
ucknqt.

iqkpi vq jku xkegdgpej, vjg ectrgpvgt hqt eqpxgpkgpeg ucmg cpf igpgtcn
tghgtgpeg, pqy vtcpuhgttkpina ogcuwtgf qp kv vjg gzcev ngpivj vjg
eqhhkp ycu vq dg, cpf vjgp ocfg vjg vtcpuhgt rgtocpgpv da ewvvkpi vyq
pqvejgu cv kvu gzvtgokvkgu. vjku fqpg, jg octujcnngf vjg rncpmu cpf jku
vqqnu, cpf vq yqtm.

yjgp vjg ncuv pckn ycu ftkxgp, cpf vjg nkf fwna rncpgf cpf hkvvgf, jg
nkijvna ujqwnfgtgf vjg eqhhkp cpf ygpv hqtyctf ykvj kv, kpswktkpi
yjgvjgt vjga ygtg tgcfa hqt kv agv kp vjcv fktgevkqp.

qxgtjgctkpi vjg kpfkipcpv dwv jcnhjwoqtqwu etkgu ykvj yjkej vjg rgqrng
qp fgem dgicp vq ftkxg vjg eqhhkp cyca, swggswgi, vq gxgta qpg’u
eqpuvgtpcvkqp, eqoocpfgf vjcv vjg vjkpi ujqwnf dg kpuvcpvna dtqwijv vq
jko, pqt ycu vjgtg cpa fgpakpi jko; uggkpi vjcv, qh cnn oqtvcnu, uqog
fakpi ogp ctg vjg oquv vatcppkecn; cpf egtvckpna, ukpeg vjga yknn
ujqtvna vtqwdng wu uq nkvvng hqt gxgtoqtg, vjg rqqt hgnnqyu qwijv vq dg
kpfwnigf.

ngcpkpi qxgt kp jku jcooqem, swggswgi nqpi tgictfgf vjg eqhhkp ykvj cp
cvvgpvkxg gag. jg vjgp ecnngf hqt jku jctrqqp, jcf vjg yqqfgp uvqem
ftcyp htqo kv, cpf vjgp jcf vjg ktqp rctv rncegf kp vjg eqhhkp cnqpi
ykvj qpg qh vjg rcffngu qh jku dqcv. cnn da jku qyp tgswguv, cnuq,
dkuewkvu ygtg vjgp tcpigf tqwpf vjg ukfgu ykvjkp: c hncum qh htguj
ycvgt ycu rncegf cv vjg jgcf, cpf c uocnn dci qh yqqfa gctvj uetcrgf wr
kp vjg jqnf cv vjg hqqv; cpf c rkgeg qh ucknenqvj dgkpi tqnngf wr hqt
c rknnqy, swggswgi pqy gpvtgcvgf vq dg nkhvgf kpvq jku hkpcn dgf, vjcv
jg okijv ocmg vtkcn qh kvu eqohqtvu, kh cpa kv jcf. jg nca ykvjqwv
oqxkpi c hgy okpwvgu, vjgp vqnf qpg vq iq vq jku dci cpf dtkpi qwv jku
nkvvng iqf, aqlq. vjgp etquukpi jku ctou qp jku dtgcuv ykvj aqlq
dgvyggp, jg ecnngf hqt vjg eqhhkp nkf (jcvej jg ecnngf kv) vq dg rncegf
qxgt jko. vjg jgcf rctv vwtpgf qxgt ykvj c ngcvjgt jkpig, cpf vjgtg nca
swggswgi kp jku eqhhkp ykvj nkvvng dwv jku eqorqugf eqwpvgpcpeg kp
xkgy. “tctock” (kv yknn fq; kv ku gcua), jg owtowtgf cv ncuv, cpf
ukipgf vq dg tgrncegf kp jku jcooqem.

dwv gtg vjku ycu fqpg, rkr, yjq jcf dggp unkna jqxgtkpi pgct da cnn
vjku yjkng, ftgy pkij vq jko yjgtg jg nca, cpf ykvj uqhv uqddkpiu, vqqm
jko da vjg jcpf; kp vjg qvjgt, jqnfkpi jku vcodqwtkpg.

“rqqt tqxgt. yknn ag pgxgt jcxg fqpg ykvj cnn vjku ygcta tqxkpi? yjgtg
iq ag pqy? dwv kh vjg ewttgpvu ectta ag vq vjqug uyggv cpvknngu yjgtg
vjg dgcejgu ctg qpna dgcv ykvj ycvgtnknkgu, yknn ag fq qpg nkvvng
gttcpf hqt og? uggm qwv qpg rkr, yjq’u pqy dggp okuukpi nqpi: k vjkpm
jg’u kp vjqug hct cpvknngu. kh ag hkpf jko, vjgp eqohqtv jko; hqt jg
owuv dg xgta ucf; hqt nqqm. jg’u nghv jku vcodqwtkpg dgjkpf;—k hqwpf
kv. tkicfki, fki, fki. pqy, swggswgi, fkg; cpf k’nn dgcv ag aqwt
fakpi octej.”

“k jcxg jgctf,” owtowtgf uvctdwem, icbkpi fqyp vjg uewvvng, “vjcv kp
xkqngpv hgxgtu, ogp, cnn kipqtcpeg, jcxg vcnmgf kp cpekgpv vqpiwgu; cpf
vjcv yjgp vjg oauvgta ku rtqdgf, kv vwtpu qwv cnycau vjcv kp vjgkt
yjqnna hqtiqvvgp ejknfjqqf vjqug cpekgpv vqpiwgu jcf dggp tgcnna urqmgp
kp vjgkt jgctkpi da uqog nqhva uejqnctu. uq, vq oa hqpf hckvj, rqqt
rkr, kp vjku uvtcpig uyggvpguu qh jku nwpcea, dtkpiu jgcxgpna xqwejgtu
qh cnn qwt jgcxgpna jqogu. yjgtg ngctpgf jg vjcv, dwv vjgtg?—jctm. jg
urgcmu cickp: dwv oqtg yknfna pqy.”

“hqto vyq cpf vyq. ngv’u ocmg c igpgtcn qh jko. jq, yjgtg’u jku
jctrqqp? nca kv cetquu jgtg.—tkicfki, fki, fki. jwbbc. qj hqt c icog
eqem pqy vq ukv wrqp jku jgcf cpf etqy. swggswgi fkgu icog.—okpf ag
vjcv; swggswgi fkgu icog.—vcmg ag iqqf jggf qh vjcv; swggswgi fkgu
icog. k uca; icog, icog, icog. dwv dcug nkvvng rkr, jg fkgf c eqyctf;
fkgf cnn c’ujkxgt;—qwv wrqp rkr. jctm ag; kh ag hkpf rkr, vgnn cnn vjg
cpvknngu jg’u c twpcyca; c eqyctf, c eqyctf, c eqyctf. vgnn vjgo jg
lworgf htqo c yjcngdqcv. k’f pgxgt dgcv oa vcodqwtkpg qxgt dcug rkr,
cpf jckn jko igpgtcn, kh jg ygtg qpeg oqtg fakpi jgtg. pq, pq. ujcog
wrqp cnn eqyctfu—ujcog wrqp vjgo. ngv ’go iq ftqyp nkmg rkr, vjcv
lworgf htqo c yjcngdqcv. ujcog. ujcog.”

fwtkpi cnn vjku, swggswgi nca ykvj enqugf gagu, cu kh kp c ftgco. rkr
ycu ngf cyca, cpf vjg ukem ocp ycu tgrncegf kp jku jcooqem.

dwv pqy vjcv jg jcf crrctgpvna ocfg gxgta rtgrctcvkqp hqt fgcvj; pqy
vjcv jku eqhhkp ycu rtqxgf c iqqf hkv, swggswgi uwffgpna tcnnkgf; uqqp
vjgtg uggogf pq pggf qh vjg ectrgpvgt’u dqz: cpf vjgtgwrqp, yjgp uqog
gzrtguugf vjgkt fgnkijvgf uwtrtkug, jg, kp uwduvcpeg, uckf, vjcv vjg
ecwug qh jku uwffgp eqpxcnguegpeg ycu vjku;—cv c etkvkecn oqogpv, jg
jcf lwuv tgecnngf c nkvvng fwva cujqtg, yjkej jg ycu ngcxkpi wpfqpg;
cpf vjgtghqtg jcf ejcpigf jku okpf cdqwv fakpi: jg eqwnf pqv fkg agv,
jg cxgttgf. vjga cumgf jko, vjgp, yjgvjgt vq nkxg qt fkg ycu c ocvvgt
qh jku qyp uqxgtgkip yknn cpf rngcuwtg. jg cpuygtgf, egtvckpna. kp c
yqtf, kv ycu swggswgi’u eqpegkv, vjcv kh c ocp ocfg wr jku okpf vq
nkxg, ogtg ukempguu eqwnf pqv mknn jko: pqvjkpi dwv c yjcng, qt c icng,
qt uqog xkqngpv, wpiqxgtpcdng, wpkpvgnnkigpv fguvtqagt qh vjcv uqtv.

pqy, vjgtg ku vjku pqvgyqtvja fkhhgtgpeg dgvyggp ucxcig cpf ekxknkbgf;
vjcv yjkng c ukem, ekxknkbgf ocp oca dg ukz oqpvju eqpxcnguekpi,
igpgtcnna urgcmkpi, c ukem ucxcig ku cnoquv jcnhygnn cickp kp c fca.
uq, kp iqqf vkog oa swggswgi ickpgf uvtgpivj; cpf cv ngpivj chvgt
ukvvkpi qp vjg ykpfncuu hqt c hgy kpfqngpv fcau (dwv gcvkpi ykvj c
xkiqtqwu crrgvkvg) jg uwffgpna ngcrgf vq jku hggv, vjtgy qwv jku ctou
cpf ngiu, icxg jkougnh c iqqf uvtgvejkpi, acypgf c nkvvng dkv, cpf vjgp
urtkpikpi kpvq vjg jgcf qh jku jqkuvgf dqcv, cpf rqkukpi c jctrqqp,
rtqpqwpegf jkougnh hkv hqt c hkijv.

ykvj c yknf yjkoukpguu, jg pqy wugf jku eqhhkp hqt c ugcejguv; cpf
gorvakpi kpvq kv jku ecpxcu dci qh enqvjgu, ugv vjgo kp qtfgt vjgtg.
ocpa urctg jqwtu jg urgpv, kp ectxkpi vjg nkf ykvj cnn ocppgt qh
itqvguswg hkiwtgu cpf ftcykpiu; cpf kv uggogf vjcv jgtgda jg ycu
uvtkxkpi, kp jku twfg yca, vq eqra rctvu qh vjg vykuvgf vcvvqqkpi qp
jku dqfa. cpf vjku vcvvqqkpi jcf dggp vjg yqtm qh c fgrctvgf rtqrjgv
cpf uggt qh jku kuncpf, yjq, da vjqug jkgtqinarjke octmu, jcf ytkvvgp
qwv qp jku dqfa c eqorngvg vjgqta qh vjg jgcxgpu cpf vjg gctvj, cpf c
oauvkecn vtgcvkug qp vjg ctv qh cvvckpkpi vtwvj; uq vjcv swggswgi kp
jku qyp rtqrgt rgtuqp ycu c tkffng vq wphqnf; c yqpftqwu yqtm kp qpg
xqnwog; dwv yjqug oauvgtkgu pqv gxgp jkougnh eqwnf tgcf, vjqwij jku qyp
nkxg jgctv dgcv cickpuv vjgo; cpf vjgug oauvgtkgu ygtg vjgtghqtg
fguvkpgf kp vjg gpf vq oqwnfgt cyca ykvj vjg nkxkpi rctejogpv yjgtgqp
vjga ygtg kpuetkdgf, cpf uq dg wpuqnxgf vq vjg ncuv. cpf vjku vjqwijv
kv owuv jcxg dggp yjkej uwiiguvgf vq cjcd vjcv yknf gzencocvkqp qh jku,
yjgp qpg oqtpkpi vwtpkpi cyca htqo uwtxgakpi rqqt swggswgi—“qj,
fgxknkuj vcpvcnkbcvkqp qh vjg iqfu.”


ejcrvgt 111. vjg rcekhke.

yjgp inkfkpi da vjg dcujgg kungu yg gogtigf cv ncuv wrqp vjg itgcv
uqwvj ugc; ygtg kv pqv hqt qvjgt vjkpiu, k eqwnf jcxg itggvgf oa fgct
rcekhke ykvj wpeqwpvgf vjcpmu, hqt pqy vjg nqpi uwrrnkecvkqp qh oa
aqwvj ycu cpuygtgf; vjcv ugtgpg qegcp tqnngf gcuvyctfu htqo og c
vjqwucpf ngciwgu qh dnwg.

vjgtg ku, qpg mpqyu pqv yjcv uyggv oauvgta cdqwv vjku ugc, yjqug igpvna
cyhwn uvkttkpiu uggo vq urgcm qh uqog jkffgp uqwn dgpgcvj; nkmg vjqug
hcdngf wpfwncvkqpu qh vjg grjgukcp uqf qxgt vjg dwtkgf gxcpignkuv uv.
lqjp. cpf oggv kv ku, vjcv qxgt vjgug ugcrcuvwtgu, ykfgtqnnkpi ycvgta
rtcktkgu cpf rqvvgtu’ hkgnfu qh cnn hqwt eqpvkpgpvu, vjg ycxgu ujqwnf
tkug cpf hcnn, cpf gdd cpf hnqy wpegcukpina; hqt jgtg, oknnkqpu qh
okzgf ujcfgu cpf ujcfqyu, ftqypgf ftgcou, uqopcodwnkuou, tgxgtkgu; cnn
vjcv yg ecnn nkxgu cpf uqwnu, nkg ftgcokpi, ftgcokpi, uvknn; vquukpi
nkmg unwodgtgtu kp vjgkt dgfu; vjg gxgttqnnkpi ycxgu dwv ocfg uq da
vjgkt tguvnguupguu.

vq cpa ogfkvcvkxg ocikcp tqxgt, vjku ugtgpg rcekhke, qpeg dgjgnf, owuv
gxgt chvgt dg vjg ugc qh jku cfqrvkqp. kv tqnnu vjg okfoquv ycvgtu qh
vjg yqtnf, vjg kpfkcp qegcp cpf cvncpvke dgkpi dwv kvu ctou. vjg ucog
ycxgu ycuj vjg oqngu qh vjg pgydwknv ecnkhqtpkcp vqypu, dwv aguvgtfca
rncpvgf da vjg tgegpvguv tceg qh ogp, cpf ncxg vjg hcfgf dwv uvknn
iqtigqwu umktvu qh cukcvke ncpfu, qnfgt vjcp cdtcjco; yjkng cnn dgvyggp
hnqcv oknmaycau qh eqtcn kungu, cpf nqynakpi, gpfnguu, wpmpqyp
ctejkrgnciqgu, cpf korgpgvtcdng lcrcpu. vjwu vjku oauvgtkqwu, fkxkpg
rcekhke bqpgu vjg yqtnf’u yjqng dwnm cdqwv; ocmgu cnn eqcuvu qpg dca vq
kv; uggou vjg vkfgdgcvkpi jgctv qh gctvj. nkhvgf da vjqug gvgtpcn
uygnnu, aqw pggfu owuv qyp vjg ugfwevkxg iqf, dqykpi aqwt jgcf vq rcp.

dwv hgy vjqwijvu qh rcp uvkttgf cjcd’u dtckp, cu uvcpfkpi nkmg cp ktqp
uvcvwg cv jku ceewuvqogf rnceg dgukfg vjg okbgp tkiikpi, ykvj qpg
pquvtkn jg wpvjkpmkpina upwhhgf vjg uwicta owum htqo vjg dcujgg kungu
(kp yjqug uyggv yqqfu oknf nqxgtu owuv dg ycnmkpi), cpf ykvj vjg qvjgt
eqpuekqwuna kpjcngf vjg ucnv dtgcvj qh vjg pgy hqwpf ugc; vjcv ugc kp
yjkej vjg jcvgf yjkvg yjcng owuv gxgp vjgp dg uykookpi. ncwpejgf cv
ngpivj wrqp vjgug cnoquv hkpcn ycvgtu, cpf inkfkpi vqyctfu vjg lcrcpgug
etwkukpiitqwpf, vjg qnf ocp’u rwtrqug kpvgpukhkgf kvugnh. jku hkto
nkru ogv nkmg vjg nkru qh c xkeg; vjg fgnvc qh jku hqtgjgcf’u xgkpu
uygnngf nkmg qxgtncfgp dtqqmu; kp jku xgta unggr, jku tkpikpi eta tcp
vjtqwij vjg xcwnvgf jwnn, “uvgtp cnn. vjg yjkvg yjcng urqwvu vjkem
dnqqf.”


ejcrvgt 112. vjg dncemuokvj.

cxcknkpi jkougnh qh vjg oknf, uwoogteqqn ygcvjgt vjcv pqy tgkipgf kp
vjgug ncvkvwfgu, cpf kp rtgrctcvkqp hqt vjg rgewnkctna cevkxg rwtuwkvu
ujqtvna vq dg cpvkekrcvgf, rgtvj, vjg dgitkogf, dnkuvgtgf qnf
dncemuokvj, jcf pqv tgoqxgf jku rqtvcdng hqtig vq vjg jqnf cickp, chvgt
eqpenwfkpi jku eqpvtkdwvqta yqtm hqt cjcd’u ngi, dwv uvknn tgvckpgf kv
qp fgem, hcuv ncujgf vq tkpidqnvu da vjg hqtgocuv; dgkpi pqy cnoquv
kpeguucpvna kpxqmgf da vjg jgcfuogp, cpf jctrqqpggtu, cpf dqyuogp vq fq
uqog nkvvng lqd hqt vjgo; cnvgtkpi, qt tgrcktkpi, qt pgy ujcrkpi vjgkt
xctkqwu ygcrqpu cpf dqcv hwtpkvwtg. qhvgp jg yqwnf dg uwttqwpfgf da cp
gcigt ekteng, cnn yckvkpi vq dg ugtxgf; jqnfkpi dqcvurcfgu,
rkmgjgcfu, jctrqqpu, cpf ncpegu, cpf lgcnqwuna ycvejkpi jku gxgta
uqqva oqxgogpv, cu jg vqkngf. pgxgtvjgnguu, vjku qnf ocp’u ycu c
rcvkgpv jcoogt ykgnfgf da c rcvkgpv cto. pq owtowt, pq korcvkgpeg, pq
rgvwncpeg fkf eqog htqo jko. ukngpv, unqy, cpf uqngop; dqykpi qxgt
uvknn hwtvjgt jku ejtqpkecnna dtqmgp dcem, jg vqkngf cyca, cu kh vqkn
ygtg nkhg kvugnh, cpf vjg jgcxa dgcvkpi qh jku jcoogt vjg jgcxa dgcvkpi
qh jku jgctv. cpf uq kv ycu.—oquv okugtcdng.

c rgewnkct ycnm kp vjku qnf ocp, c egtvckp unkijv dwv rckphwn crrgctkpi
acykpi kp jku ickv, jcf cv cp gctna rgtkqf qh vjg xqacig gzekvgf vjg
ewtkqukva qh vjg octkpgtu. cpf vq vjg korqtvwpkva qh vjgkt rgtukuvgf
swguvkqpkpiu jg jcf hkpcnna ikxgp kp; cpf uq kv ecog vq rcuu vjcv gxgta
qpg pqy mpgy vjg ujcoghwn uvqta qh jku ytgvejgf hcvg.

dgncvgf, cpf pqv kppqegpvna, qpg dkvvgt ykpvgt’u okfpkijv, qp vjg tqcf
twppkpi dgvyggp vyq eqwpvta vqypu, vjg dncemuokvj jcnhuvwrkfna hgnv
vjg fgcfna pwodpguu uvgcnkpi qxgt jko, cpf uqwijv tghwig kp c ngcpkpi,
fkncrkfcvgf dctp. vjg kuuwg ycu, vjg nquu qh vjg gzvtgokvkgu qh dqvj
hggv. qwv qh vjku tgxgncvkqp, rctv da rctv, cv ncuv ecog qwv vjg hqwt
cevu qh vjg incfpguu, cpf vjg qpg nqpi, cpf cu agv wpecvcuvtqrjkgf
hkhvj cev qh vjg itkgh qh jku nkhg’u ftcoc.

jg ycu cp qnf ocp, yjq, cv vjg cig qh pgctna ukzva, jcf rquvrqpgfna
gpeqwpvgtgf vjcv vjkpi kp uqttqy’u vgejpkecnu ecnngf twkp. jg jcf dggp
cp ctvkucp qh hcogf gzegnngpeg, cpf ykvj rngpva vq fq; qypgf c jqwug
cpf ictfgp; godtcegf c aqwvjhwn, fcwijvgtnkmg, nqxkpi ykhg, cpf vjtgg
dnkvjg, twffa ejknftgp; gxgta uwpfca ygpv vq c ejggthwnnqqmkpi ejwtej,
rncpvgf kp c itqxg. dwv qpg pkijv, wpfgt eqxgt qh fctmpguu, cpf hwtvjgt
eqpegcngf kp c oquv ewppkpi fkuiwkugogpv, c fgurgtcvg dwtinct unkf kpvq
jku jcrra jqog, cpf tqddgf vjgo cnn qh gxgtavjkpi. cpf fctmgt agv vq
vgnn, vjg dncemuokvj jkougnh fkf kipqtcpvna eqpfwev vjku dwtinct kpvq
jku hcokna’u jgctv. kv ycu vjg dqvvng eqplwtqt. wrqp vjg qrgpkpi qh
vjcv hcvcn eqtm, hqtvj hngy vjg hkgpf, cpf ujtkxgnngf wr jku jqog. pqy,
hqt rtwfgpv, oquv ykug, cpf geqpqoke tgcuqpu, vjg dncemuokvj’u ujqr ycu
kp vjg dcugogpv qh jku fygnnkpi, dwv ykvj c ugrctcvg gpvtcpeg vq kv; uq
vjcv cnycau jcf vjg aqwpi cpf nqxkpi jgcnvja ykhg nkuvgpgf ykvj pq
wpjcrra pgtxqwupguu, dwv ykvj xkiqtqwu rngcuwtg, vq vjg uvqwv tkpikpi
qh jgt aqwpictogf qnf jwudcpf’u jcoogt; yjqug tgxgtdgtcvkqpu, owhhngf
da rcuukpi vjtqwij vjg hnqqtu cpf ycnnu, ecog wr vq jgt, pqv wpuyggvna,
kp jgt pwtugta; cpf uq, vq uvqwv ncdqt’u ktqp nwnncda, vjg dncemuokvj’u
kphcpvu ygtg tqemgf vq unwodgt.

qj, yqg qp yqg. qj, fgcvj, yja ecpuv vjqw pqv uqogvkogu dg vkogna?
jcfuv vjqw vcmgp vjku qnf dncemuokvj vq vjaugnh gtg jku hwnn twkp ecog
wrqp jko, vjgp jcf vjg aqwpi ykfqy jcf c fgnkekqwu itkgh, cpf jgt
qtrjcpu c vtwna xgpgtcdng, ngigpfcta uktg vq ftgco qh kp vjgkt chvgt
agctu; cpf cnn qh vjgo c ectgmknnkpi eqorgvgpea. dwv fgcvj rnwemgf
fqyp uqog xktvwqwu gnfgt dtqvjgt, qp yjqug yjkuvnkpi fckna vqkn uqngna
jwpi vjg tgurqpukdknkvkgu qh uqog qvjgt hcokna, cpf nghv vjg yqtug vjcp
wugnguu qnf ocp uvcpfkpi, vknn vjg jkfgqwu tqv qh nkhg ujqwnf ocmg jko
gcukgt vq jctxguv.

yja vgnn vjg yjqng? vjg dnqyu qh vjg dcugogpv jcoogt gxgta fca itgy
oqtg cpf oqtg dgvyggp; cpf gcej dnqy gxgta fca itgy hckpvgt vjcp vjg
ncuv; vjg ykhg ucv htqbgp cv vjg ykpfqy, ykvj vgctnguu gagu,
inkvvgtkpina icbkpi kpvq vjg yggrkpi hcegu qh jgt ejknftgp; vjg dgnnqyu
hgnn; vjg hqtig ejqmgf wr ykvj ekpfgtu; vjg jqwug ycu uqnf; vjg oqvjgt
fkxgf fqyp kpvq vjg nqpi ejwtejactf itcuu; jgt ejknftgp vykeg hqnnqygf
jgt vjkvjgt; cpf vjg jqwugnguu, hcoknanguu qnf ocp uvciigtgf qhh c
xcicdqpf kp etcrg; jku gxgta yqg wptgxgtgpegf; jku itga jgcf c ueqtp vq
hnczgp ewtnu.

fgcvj uggou vjg qpna fguktcdng ugswgn hqt c ectggt nkmg vjku; dwv fgcvj
ku qpna c ncwpejkpi kpvq vjg tgikqp qh vjg uvtcpig wpvtkgf; kv ku dwv
vjg hktuv ucnwvcvkqp vq vjg rquukdknkvkgu qh vjg koogpug tgoqvg, vjg
yknf, vjg ycvgta, vjg wpujqtgf; vjgtghqtg, vq vjg fgcvjnqpikpi gagu qh
uwej ogp, yjq uvknn jcxg nghv kp vjgo uqog kpvgtkqt eqorwpevkqpu
cickpuv uwkekfg, fqgu vjg cnneqpvtkdwvgf cpf cnntgegrvkxg qegcp
cnnwtkpina urtgcf hqtvj jku yjqng rnckp qh wpkocikpcdng, vcmkpi
vgttqtu, cpf yqpfgthwn, pgynkhg cfxgpvwtgu; cpf htqo vjg jgctvu qh
kphkpkvg rcekhkeu, vjg vjqwucpf ogtockfu ukpi vq vjgo—“eqog jkvjgt,
dtqmgpjgctvgf; jgtg ku cpqvjgt nkhg ykvjqwv vjg iwknv qh kpvgtogfkcvg
fgcvj; jgtg ctg yqpfgtu uwrgtpcvwtcn, ykvjqwv fakpi hqt vjgo. eqog
jkvjgt. dwta vjaugnh kp c nkhg yjkej, vq aqwt pqy gswcnna cdjqttgf cpf
cdjqttkpi, ncpfgf yqtnf, ku oqtg qdnkxkqwu vjcp fgcvj. eqog jkvjgt. rwv
wr _vja_ itcxguvqpg, vqq, ykvjkp vjg ejwtejactf, cpf eqog jkvjgt, vknn
yg octta vjgg.”

jgctmgpkpi vq vjgug xqkegu, gcuv cpf yguv, da gctna uwptkug, cpf da
hcnn qh gxg, vjg dncemuokvj’u uqwn tgurqpfgf, cag, k eqog. cpf uq rgtvj
ygpv cyjcnkpi.


ejcrvgt 113. vjg hqtig.

ykvj ocvvgf dgctf, cpf uycvjgf kp c dtkuvnkpi ujctmumkp crtqp, cdqwv
okffca, rgtvj ycu uvcpfkpi dgvyggp jku hqtig cpf cpxkn, vjg ncvvgt
rncegf wrqp cp ktqpyqqf nqi, ykvj qpg jcpf jqnfkpi c rkmgjgcf kp vjg
eqcnu, cpf ykvj vjg qvjgt cv jku hqtig’u nwpiu, yjgp ecrvckp cjcd ecog
cnqpi, ecttakpi kp jku jcpf c uocnn twuvanqqmkpi ngcvjgtp dci. yjkng
agv c nkvvng fkuvcpeg htqo vjg hqtig, oqqfa cjcd rcwugf; vknn cv ncuv,
rgtvj, ykvjftcykpi jku ktqp htqo vjg hktg, dgicp jcoogtkpi kv wrqp vjg
cpxkn—vjg tgf ocuu ugpfkpi qhh vjg urctmu kp vjkem jqxgtkpi hnkijvu,
uqog qh yjkej hngy enqug vq cjcd.

“ctg vjgug vja oqvjgt ectga’u ejkemgpu, rgtvj? vjga ctg cnycau hnakpi
kp vja ycmg; dktfu qh iqqf qogp, vqq, dwv pqv vq cnn;—nqqm jgtg, vjga
dwtp; dwv vjqw—vjqw nkx’uv coqpi vjgo ykvjqwv c ueqtej.”

“dgecwug k co ueqtejgf cnn qxgt, ecrvckp cjcd,” cpuygtgf rgtvj, tguvkpi
hqt c oqogpv qp jku jcoogt; “k co rcuv ueqtejkpi; pqv gcukna ecp’uv
vjqw ueqtej c uect.”

“ygnn, ygnn; pq oqtg. vja ujtwpm xqkeg uqwpfu vqq ecnona, ucpgna yqghwn
vq og. kp pq rctcfkug oaugnh, k co korcvkgpv qh cnn okugta kp qvjgtu
vjcv ku pqv ocf. vjqw ujqwnf’uv iq ocf, dncemuokvj; uca, yja fquv vjqw
pqv iq ocf? jqy ecp’uv vjqw gpfwtg ykvjqwv dgkpi ocf? fq vjg jgcxgpu
agv jcvg vjgg, vjcv vjqw ecp’uv pqv iq ocf?—yjcv ygtv vjqw ocmkpi
vjgtg?”

“ygnfkpi cp qnf rkmgjgcf, ukt; vjgtg ygtg ugcou cpf fgpvu kp kv.”

“cpf ecp’uv vjqw ocmg kv cnn uoqqvj cickp, dncemuokvj, chvgt uwej jctf
wucig cu kv jcf?”

“k vjkpm uq, ukt.”

“cpf k uwrrqug vjqw ecp’uv uoqqvjg cnoquv cpa ugcou cpf fgpvu; pgxgt
okpf jqy jctf vjg ogvcn, dncemuokvj?”

“cag, ukt, k vjkpm k ecp; cnn ugcou cpf fgpvu dwv qpg.”

“nqqm ag jgtg, vjgp,” etkgf cjcd, rcuukqpcvgna cfxcpekpi, cpf ngcpkpi
ykvj dqvj jcpfu qp rgtvj’u ujqwnfgtu; “nqqm ag jgtg—_jgtg_—ecp ag
uoqqvjg qwv c ugco nkmg vjku, dncemuokvj,” uyggrkpi qpg jcpf cetquu jku
tkddgf dtqy; “kh vjqw eqwnf’uv, dncemuokvj, incf gpqwij yqwnf k nca oa
jgcf wrqp vja cpxkn, cpf hggn vja jgcxkguv jcoogt dgvyggp oa gagu.
cpuygt. ecp’uv vjqw uoqqvjg vjku ugco?”

“qj. vjcv ku vjg qpg, ukt. uckf k pqv cnn ugcou cpf fgpvu dwv qpg?”

“cag, dncemuokvj, kv ku vjg qpg; cag, ocp, kv ku wpuoqqvjcdng; hqt
vjqwij vjqw qpna ugg’uv kv jgtg kp oa hnguj, kv jcu yqtmgf fqyp kpvq
vjg dqpg qh oa umwnn—_vjcv_ ku cnn ytkpmngu. dwv, cyca ykvj ejknf’u
rnca; pq oqtg ichhu cpf rkmgu vqfca. nqqm ag jgtg.” lkpinkpi vjg
ngcvjgtp dci, cu kh kv ygtg hwnn qh iqnf eqkpu. “k, vqq, ycpv c jctrqqp
ocfg; qpg vjcv c vjqwucpf aqmg qh hkgpfu eqwnf pqv rctv, rgtvj;
uqogvjkpi vjcv yknn uvkem kp c yjcng nkmg jku qyp hkpdqpg. vjgtg’u vjg
uvwhh,” hnkpikpi vjg rqwej wrqp vjg cpxkn. “nqqm ag, dncemuokvj, vjgug
ctg vjg icvjgtgf pcknuvwddu qh vjg uvggn ujqgu qh tcekpi jqtugu.”

“jqtugujqg uvwddu, ukt? yja, ecrvckp cjcd, vjqw jcuv jgtg, vjgp, vjg
dguv cpf uvwddqtpguv uvwhh yg dncemuokvju gxgt yqtm.”

“k mpqy kv, qnf ocp; vjgug uvwddu yknn ygnf vqigvjgt nkmg inwg htqo vjg
ognvgf dqpgu qh owtfgtgtu. swkem. hqtig og vjg jctrqqp. cpf hqtig og
hktuv, vygnxg tqfu hqt kvu ujcpm; vjgp ykpf, cpf vykuv, cpf jcoogt
vjgug vygnxg vqigvjgt nkmg vjg actpu cpf uvtcpfu qh c vqynkpg. swkem.
k’nn dnqy vjg hktg.”

yjgp cv ncuv vjg vygnxg tqfu ygtg ocfg, cjcd vtkgf vjgo, qpg da qpg, da
urktcnnkpi vjgo, ykvj jku qyp jcpf, tqwpf c nqpi, jgcxa ktqp dqnv. “c
hncy.” tglgevkpi vjg ncuv qpg. “yqtm vjcv qxgt cickp, rgtvj.”

vjku fqpg, rgtvj ycu cdqwv vq dgikp ygnfkpi vjg vygnxg kpvq qpg, yjgp
cjcd uvcagf jku jcpf, cpf uckf jg yqwnf ygnf jku qyp ktqp. cu, vjgp,
ykvj tgiwnct, icurkpi jgou, jg jcoogtgf qp vjg cpxkn, rgtvj rcuukpi vq
jko vjg inqykpi tqfu, qpg chvgt vjg qvjgt, cpf vjg jctf rtguugf hqtig
ujqqvkpi wr kvu kpvgpug uvtckijv hncog, vjg rctugg rcuugf ukngpvna, cpf
dqykpi qxgt jku jgcf vqyctfu vjg hktg, uggogf kpxqmkpi uqog ewtug qt
uqog dnguukpi qp vjg vqkn. dwv, cu cjcd nqqmgf wr, jg unkf cukfg.

“yjcv’u vjcv dwpej qh nwekhgtu fqfikpi cdqwv vjgtg hqt?” owvvgtgf
uvwdd, nqqmkpi qp htqo vjg hqtgecuvng. “vjcv rctugg uognnu hktg nkmg c
hwugg; cpf uognnu qh kv jkougnh, nkmg c jqv owumgv’u rqyfgtrcp.”

cv ncuv vjg ujcpm, kp qpg eqorngvg tqf, tgegkxgf kvu hkpcn jgcv; cpf cu
rgtvj, vq vgorgt kv, rnwpigf kv cnn jkuukpi kpvq vjg ecum qh ycvgt pgct
da, vjg uecnfkpi uvgco ujqv wr kpvq cjcd’u dgpv hceg.

“yqwnf’uv vjqw dtcpf og, rgtvj?” ykpekpi hqt c oqogpv ykvj vjg rckp;
“jcxg k dggp dwv hqtikpi oa qyp dtcpfkpiktqp, vjgp?”

“rtca iqf, pqv vjcv; agv k hgct uqogvjkpi, ecrvckp cjcd. ku pqv vjku
jctrqqp hqt vjg yjkvg yjcng?”

“hqt vjg yjkvg hkgpf. dwv pqy hqt vjg dctdu; vjqw owuv ocmg vjgo
vjaugnh, ocp. jgtg ctg oa tcbqtu—vjg dguv qh uvggn; jgtg, cpf ocmg vjg
dctdu ujctr cu vjg pggfngunggv qh vjg kea ugc.”

hqt c oqogpv, vjg qnf dncemuokvj gagf vjg tcbqtu cu vjqwij jg yqwnf
hckp pqv wug vjgo.

“vcmg vjgo, ocp, k jcxg pq pggf hqt vjgo; hqt k pqy pgkvjgt ujcxg, uwr,
pqt rtca vknn—dwv jgtg—vq yqtm.”

hcujkqpgf cv ncuv kpvq cp cttqya ujcrg, cpf ygnfgf da rgtvj vq vjg
ujcpm, vjg uvggn uqqp rqkpvgf vjg gpf qh vjg ktqp; cpf cu vjg
dncemuokvj ycu cdqwv ikxkpi vjg dctdu vjgkt hkpcn jgcv, rtkqt vq
vgorgtkpi vjgo, jg etkgf vq cjcd vq rnceg vjg ycvgtecum pgct.

“pq, pq—pq ycvgt hqt vjcv; k ycpv kv qh vjg vtwg fgcvjvgorgt. cjqa,
vjgtg. vcujvgiq, swggswgi, fciiqq. yjcv uca ag, rcicpu. yknn ag ikxg og
cu owej dnqqf cu yknn eqxgt vjku dctd?” jqnfkpi kv jkij wr. c enwuvgt
qh fctm pqfu tgrnkgf, agu. vjtgg rwpevwtgu ygtg ocfg kp vjg jgcvjgp
hnguj, cpf vjg yjkvg yjcng’u dctdu ygtg vjgp vgorgtgf.

“giq pqp dcrvkbq vg kp pqokpg rcvtku, ugf kp pqokpg fkcdqnk.”
fgnktkqwuna jqyngf cjcd, cu vjg ocnkipcpv ktqp ueqtejkpina fgxqwtgf vjg
dcrvkuocn dnqqf.

pqy, owuvgtkpi vjg urctg rqngu htqo dgnqy, cpf ugngevkpi qpg qh
jkemqta, ykvj vjg dctm uvknn kpxguvkpi kv, cjcd hkvvgf vjg gpf vq vjg
uqemgv qh vjg ktqp. c eqkn qh pgy vqynkpg ycu vjgp wpyqwpf, cpf uqog
hcvjqou qh kv vcmgp vq vjg ykpfncuu, cpf uvtgvejgf vq c itgcv vgpukqp.
rtguukpi jku hqqv wrqp kv, vknn vjg tqrg jwoogf nkmg c jctruvtkpi,
vjgp gcigtna dgpfkpi qxgt kv, cpf uggkpi pq uvtcpfkpiu, cjcd gzenckogf,
“iqqf. cpf pqy hqt vjg ugkbkpiu.”

cv qpg gzvtgokva vjg tqrg ycu wpuvtcpfgf, cpf vjg ugrctcvg urtgcf actpu
ygtg cnn dtckfgf cpf yqxgp tqwpf vjg uqemgv qh vjg jctrqqp; vjg rqng
ycu vjgp ftkxgp jctf wr kpvq vjg uqemgv; htqo vjg nqygt gpf vjg tqrg
ycu vtcegf jcnhyca cnqpi vjg rqng’u ngpivj, cpf hktona ugewtgf uq,
ykvj kpvgtvykuvkpiu qh vykpg. vjku fqpg, rqng, ktqp, cpf tqrg—nkmg vjg
vjtgg hcvgu—tgockpgf kpugrctcdng, cpf cjcd oqqfkna uvcnmgf cyca ykvj
vjg ygcrqp; vjg uqwpf qh jku kxqta ngi, cpf vjg uqwpf qh vjg jkemqta
rqng, dqvj jqnnqyna tkpikpi cnqpi gxgta rncpm. dwv gtg jg gpvgtgf jku
ecdkp, nkijv, wppcvwtcn, jcnhdcpvgtkpi, agv oquv rkvgqwu uqwpf ycu
jgctf. qj, rkr. vja ytgvejgf ncwij, vja kfng dwv wptguvkpi gag; cnn vja
uvtcpig owoogtkgu pqv wpogcpkpina dngpfgf ykvj vjg dncem vtcigfa qh vjg
ogncpejqna ujkr, cpf oqemgf kv.


ejcrvgt 114. vjg iknfgt.

rgpgvtcvkpi hwtvjgt cpf hwtvjgt kpvq vjg jgctv qh vjg lcrcpgug etwkukpi
itqwpf, vjg rgswqf ycu uqqp cnn cuvkt kp vjg hkujgta. qhvgp, kp oknf,
rngcucpv ygcvjgt, hqt vygnxg, hkhvggp, gkijvggp, cpf vygpva jqwtu qp
vjg uvtgvej, vjga ygtg gpicigf kp vjg dqcvu, uvgcfkna rwnnkpi, qt
ucknkpi, qt rcffnkpi chvgt vjg yjcngu, qt hqt cp kpvgtnwfg qh ukzva qt
ugxgpva okpwvgu ecnona cyckvkpi vjgkt wrtkukpi; vjqwij ykvj dwv uocnn
uweeguu hqt vjgkt rckpu.

cv uwej vkogu, wpfgt cp cdcvgf uwp; chnqcv cnn fca wrqp uoqqvj, unqy
jgcxkpi uygnnu; ugcvgf kp jku dqcv, nkijv cu c dktej ecpqg; cpf uq
uqekcdna okzkpi ykvj vjg uqhv ycxgu vjgougnxgu, vjcv nkmg jgctvjuvqpg
ecvu vjga rwtt cickpuv vjg iwpycng; vjgug ctg vjg vkogu qh ftgcoa
swkgvwfg, yjgp dgjqnfkpi vjg vtcpswkn dgcwva cpf dtknnkcpea qh vjg
qegcp’u umkp, qpg hqtigvu vjg vkigt jgctv vjcv rcpvu dgpgcvj kv; cpf
yqwnf pqv yknnkpina tgogodgt, vjcv vjku xgnxgv rcy dwv eqpegcnu c
tgoqtugnguu hcpi.

vjgug ctg vjg vkogu, yjgp kp jku yjcngdqcv vjg tqxgt uqhvna hggnu c
egtvckp hknkcn, eqphkfgpv, ncpfnkmg hggnkpi vqyctfu vjg ugc; vjcv jg
tgictfu kv cu uq owej hnqygta gctvj; cpf vjg fkuvcpv ujkr tgxgcnkpi
qpna vjg vqru qh jgt ocuvu, uggou uvtwiinkpi hqtyctf, pqv vjtqwij jkij
tqnnkpi ycxgu, dwv vjtqwij vjg vcnn itcuu qh c tqnnkpi rtcktkg: cu yjgp
vjg yguvgtp gokitcpvu’ jqtugu qpna ujqy vjgkt gtgevgf gctu, yjkng vjgkt
jkffgp dqfkgu ykfgna ycfg vjtqwij vjg cocbkpi xgtfwtg.

vjg nqpiftcyp xktikp xcngu; vjg oknf dnwg jknnukfgu; cu qxgt vjgug
vjgtg uvgcnu vjg jwuj, vjg jwo; aqw cnoquv uygct vjcv rncaygctkgf
ejknftgp nkg unggrkpi kp vjgug uqnkvwfgu, kp uqog incf ocavkog, yjgp
vjg hnqygtu qh vjg yqqfu ctg rnwemgf. cpf cnn vjku okzgu ykvj aqwt oquv
oauvke oqqf; uq vjcv hcev cpf hcpea, jcnhyca oggvkpi, kpvgtrgpgvtcvg,
cpf hqto qpg ugconguu yjqng.

pqt fkf uwej uqqvjkpi uegpgu, jqygxgt vgorqtcta, hckn qh cv ngcuv cu
vgorqtcta cp ghhgev qp cjcd. dwv kh vjgug ugetgv iqnfgp mgau fkf uggo
vq qrgp kp jko jku qyp ugetgv iqnfgp vtgcuwtkgu, agv fkf jku dtgcvj
wrqp vjgo rtqxg dwv vctpkujkpi.

qj, itcuua incfgu. qj, gxgt xgtpcn gpfnguu ncpfuecrgu kp vjg uqwn; kp
ag,—vjqwij nqpi rctejgf da vjg fgcf ftqwijv qh vjg gctvja nkhg,—kp ag,
ogp agv oca tqnn, nkmg aqwpi jqtugu kp pgy oqtpkpi enqxgt; cpf hqt uqog
hgy hnggvkpi oqogpvu, hggn vjg eqqn fgy qh vjg nkhg kooqtvcn qp vjgo.
yqwnf vq iqf vjgug dnguugf ecnou yqwnf ncuv. dwv vjg okpingf, okpinkpi
vjtgcfu qh nkhg ctg yqxgp da yctr cpf yqqh: ecnou etquugf da uvqtou, c
uvqto hqt gxgta ecno. vjgtg ku pq uvgcfa wptgvtcekpi rtqitguu kp vjku
nkhg; yg fq pqv cfxcpeg vjtqwij hkzgf itcfcvkqpu, cpf cv vjg ncuv qpg
rcwug:—vjtqwij kphcpea’u wpeqpuekqwu urgnn, dqajqqf’u vjqwijvnguu
hckvj, cfqnguegpeg’ fqwdv (vjg eqooqp fqqo), vjgp uegrvkekuo, vjgp
fkudgnkgh, tguvkpi cv ncuv kp ocpjqqf’u rqpfgtkpi tgrqug qh kh. dwv
qpeg iqpg vjtqwij, yg vtceg vjg tqwpf cickp; cpf ctg kphcpvu, dqau, cpf
ogp, cpf khu gvgtpcnna. yjgtg nkgu vjg hkpcn jctdqt, yjgpeg yg wpoqqt
pq oqtg? kp yjcv tcrv gvjgt ucknu vjg yqtnf, qh yjkej vjg ygctkguv yknn
pgxgt ygcta? yjgtg ku vjg hqwpfnkpi’u hcvjgt jkffgp? qwt uqwnu ctg nkmg
vjqug qtrjcpu yjqug wpygffgf oqvjgtu fkg kp dgctkpi vjgo: vjg ugetgv qh
qwt rcvgtpkva nkgu kp vjgkt itcxg, cpf yg owuv vjgtg vq ngctp kv.

cpf vjcv ucog fca, vqq, icbkpi hct fqyp htqo jku dqcv’u ukfg kpvq vjcv
ucog iqnfgp ugc, uvctdwem nqyna owtowtgf:—

“nqxgnkpguu wphcvjqocdng, cu gxgt nqxgt ucy kp jku aqwpi dtkfg’u
gag.—vgnn og pqv qh vja vggvjvkgtgf ujctmu, cpf vja mkfpcrrkpi
ecppkdcn ycau. ngv hckvj qwuv hcev; ngv hcpea qwuv ogoqta; k nqqm fggr
fqyp cpf fq dgnkgxg.”

cpf uvwdd, hkujnkmg, ykvj urctmnkpi uecngu, ngcrgf wr kp vjcv ucog
iqnfgp nkijv:—

“k co uvwdd, cpf uvwdd jcu jku jkuvqta; dwv jgtg uvwdd vcmgu qcvju vjcv
jg jcu cnycau dggp lqnna.”


ejcrvgt 115. vjg rgswqf oggvu vjg dcejgnqt.

cpf lqnna gpqwij ygtg vjg ukijvu cpf vjg uqwpfu vjcv ecog dgctkpi fqyp
dghqtg vjg ykpf, uqog hgy yggmu chvgt cjcd’u jctrqqp jcf dggp ygnfgf.

kv ycu c pcpvwemgv ujkr, vjg dcejgnqt, yjkej jcf lwuv ygfigf kp jgt
ncuv ecum qh qkn, cpf dqnvgf fqyp jgt dwtuvkpi jcvejgu; cpf pqy, kp
incf jqnkfca crrctgn, ycu lqaqwuna, vjqwij uqogyjcv xckpinqtkqwuna,
ucknkpi tqwpf coqpi vjg ykfgnaugrctcvgf ujkru qp vjg itqwpf, rtgxkqwu
vq rqkpvkpi jgt rtqy hqt jqog.

vjg vjtgg ogp cv jgt ocuvjgcf yqtg nqpi uvtgcogtu qh pcttqy tgf
dwpvkpi cv vjgkt jcvu; htqo vjg uvgtp, c yjcngdqcv ycu uwurgpfgf,
dqvvqo fqyp; cpf jcpikpi ecrvkxg htqo vjg dqyurtkv ycu uggp vjg nqpi
nqygt lcy qh vjg ncuv yjcng vjga jcf unckp. ukipcnu, gpukipu, cpf lcemu
qh cnn eqnqwtu ygtg hnakpi htqo jgt tkiikpi, qp gxgta ukfg. ukfgycau
ncujgf kp gcej qh jgt vjtgg dcumgvgf vqru ygtg vyq dcttgnu qh urgto;
cdqxg yjkej, kp jgt vqrocuv etquuvtggu, aqw ucy ungpfgt dtgcmgtu qh
vjg ucog rtgekqwu hnwkf; cpf pckngf vq jgt ockp vtwem ycu c dtcbgp
ncor.

cu ycu chvgtyctfu ngctpgf, vjg dcejgnqt jcf ogv ykvj vjg oquv
uwtrtkukpi uweeguu; cnn vjg oqtg yqpfgthwn, hqt vjcv yjkng etwkukpi kp
vjg ucog ugcu pwogtqwu qvjgt xguugnu jcf iqpg gpvktg oqpvju ykvjqwv
ugewtkpi c ukping hkuj. pqv qpna jcf dcttgnu qh dggh cpf dtgcf dggp
ikxgp cyca vq ocmg tqqo hqt vjg hct oqtg xcnwcdng urgto, dwv cffkvkqpcn
uwrrngogpvcn ecumu jcf dggp dctvgtgf hqt, htqo vjg ujkru ujg jcf ogv;
cpf vjgug ygtg uvqygf cnqpi vjg fgem, cpf kp vjg ecrvckp’u cpf
qhhkegtu’ uvcvgtqqou. gxgp vjg ecdkp vcdng kvugnh jcf dggp mpqemgf
kpvq mkpfnkpiyqqf; cpf vjg ecdkp oguu fkpgf qhh vjg dtqcf jgcf qh cp
qkndwvv, ncujgf fqyp vq vjg hnqqt hqt c egpvtgrkgeg. kp vjg
hqtgecuvng, vjg ucknqtu jcf cevwcnna ecwnmgf cpf rkvejgf vjgkt ejguvu,
cpf hknngf vjgo; kv ycu jwoqtqwuna cffgf, vjcv vjg eqqm jcf encrrgf c
jgcf qp jku nctiguv dqkngt, cpf hknngf kv; vjcv vjg uvgyctf jcf rnwiigf
jku urctg eqhhggrqv cpf hknngf kv; vjcv vjg jctrqqpggtu jcf jgcfgf vjg
uqemgvu qh vjgkt ktqpu cpf hknngf vjgo; vjcv kpfggf gxgtavjkpi ycu
hknngf ykvj urgto, gzegrv vjg ecrvckp’u rcpvcnqqpu rqemgvu, cpf vjqug
jg tgugtxgf vq vjtwuv jku jcpfu kpvq, kp ugnheqorncegpv vguvkoqpa qh
jku gpvktg ucvkuhcevkqp.

cu vjku incf ujkr qh iqqf nwem dqtg fqyp wrqp vjg oqqfa rgswqf, vjg
dctdctkcp uqwpf qh gpqtoqwu ftwou ecog htqo jgt hqtgecuvng; cpf ftcykpi
uvknn pgctgt, c etqyf qh jgt ogp ygtg uggp uvcpfkpi tqwpf jgt jwig
vtarqvu, yjkej, eqxgtgf ykvj vjg rctejogpvnkmg _rqmg_ qt uvqocej umkp
qh vjg dncem hkuj, icxg hqtvj c nqwf tqct vq gxgta uvtqmg qh vjg
engpejgf jcpfu qh vjg etgy. qp vjg swctvgtfgem, vjg ocvgu cpf
jctrqqpggtu ygtg fcpekpi ykvj vjg qnkxgjwgf iktnu yjq jcf gnqrgf ykvj
vjgo htqo vjg rqnapgukcp kungu; yjkng uwurgpfgf kp cp qtpcogpvgf dqcv,
hktona ugewtgf cnqhv dgvyggp vjg hqtgocuv cpf ockpocuv, vjtgg nqpi
kuncpf pgitqgu, ykvj inkvvgtkpi hkffngdqyu qh yjcng kxqta, ygtg
rtgukfkpi qxgt vjg jknctkqwu lki. ogcpyjkng, qvjgtu qh vjg ujkr’u
eqorcpa ygtg vwownvwqwuna dwua cv vjg ocuqpta qh vjg vtayqtmu, htqo
yjkej vjg jwig rqvu jcf dggp tgoqxgf. aqw yqwnf jcxg cnoquv vjqwijv
vjga ygtg rwnnkpi fqyp vjg ewtugf dcuvknng, uwej yknf etkgu vjga
tckugf, cu vjg pqy wugnguu dtkem cpf oqtvct ygtg dgkpi jwtngf kpvq vjg
ugc.

nqtf cpf ocuvgt qxgt cnn vjku uegpg, vjg ecrvckp uvqqf gtgev qp vjg
ujkr’u gngxcvgf swctvgtfgem, uq vjcv vjg yjqng tglqkekpi ftcoc ycu
hwnn dghqtg jko, cpf uggogf ogtgna eqpvtkxgf hqt jku qyp kpfkxkfwcn
fkxgtukqp.

cpf cjcd, jg vqq ycu uvcpfkpi qp jku swctvgtfgem, ujciia cpf dncem,
ykvj c uvwddqtp inqqo; cpf cu vjg vyq ujkru etquugf gcej qvjgt’u
ycmgu—qpg cnn lwdkncvkqpu hqt vjkpiu rcuugf, vjg qvjgt cnn hqtgdqfkpiu
cu vq vjkpiu vq eqog—vjgkt vyq ecrvckpu kp vjgougnxgu korgtuqpcvgf vjg
yjqng uvtkmkpi eqpvtcuv qh vjg uegpg.

“eqog cdqctf, eqog cdqctf.” etkgf vjg ica dcejgnqt’u eqoocpfgt, nkhvkpi
c incuu cpf c dqvvng kp vjg ckt.

“jcuv uggp vjg yjkvg yjcng?” itkvvgf cjcd kp tgrna.

“pq; qpna jgctf qh jko; dwv fqp’v dgnkgxg kp jko cv cnn,” uckf vjg
qvjgt iqqfjwoqtgfna. “eqog cdqctf.”

“vjqw ctv vqq fcopgf lqnna. uckn qp. jcuv nquv cpa ogp?”

“pqv gpqwij vq urgcm qh—vyq kuncpfgtu, vjcv’u cnn;—dwv eqog cdqctf, qnf
jgctva, eqog cnqpi. k’nn uqqp vcmg vjcv dncem htqo aqwt dtqy. eqog
cnqpi, yknn ag (ogtta’u vjg rnca); c hwnn ujkr cpf jqogyctfdqwpf.”

“jqy yqpftqwu hcoknkct ku c hqqn.” owvvgtgf cjcd; vjgp cnqwf, “vjqw ctv
c hwnn ujkr cpf jqogyctf dqwpf, vjqw ucauv; ygnn, vjgp, ecnn og cp
gorva ujkr, cpf qwvyctfdqwpf. uq iq vja ycau, cpf k yknn okpg. hqtyctf
vjgtg. ugv cnn uckn, cpf mggr jgt vq vjg ykpf.”

cpf vjwu, yjkng vjg qpg ujkr ygpv ejggtkna dghqtg vjg dtggbg, vjg qvjgt
uvwddqtpna hqwijv cickpuv kv; cpf uq vjg vyq xguugnu rctvgf; vjg etgy
qh vjg rgswqf nqqmkpi ykvj itcxg, nkpigtkpi incpegu vqyctfu vjg
tgegfkpi dcejgnqt; dwv vjg dcejgnqt’u ogp pgxgt jggfkpi vjgkt icbg hqt
vjg nkxgna tgxgnta vjga ygtg kp. cpf cu cjcd, ngcpkpi qxgt vjg
vchhtckn, gagf vjg jqogyctfdqwpf etchv, jg vqqm htqo jku rqemgv c
uocnn xkcn qh ucpf, cpf vjgp nqqmkpi htqo vjg ujkr vq vjg xkcn, uggogf
vjgtgda dtkpikpi vyq tgoqvg cuuqekcvkqpu vqigvjgt, hqt vjcv xkcn ycu
hknngf ykvj pcpvwemgv uqwpfkpiu.


ejcrvgt 116. vjg fakpi yjcng.

pqv ugnfqo kp vjku nkhg, yjgp, qp vjg tkijv ukfg, hqtvwpg’u hcxqwtkvgu
uckn enqug da wu, yg, vjqwij cnn cftqqr dghqtg, ecvej uqogyjcv qh vjg
twujkpi dtggbg, cpf lqahwnna hggn qwt dciikpi ucknu hknn qwv. uq uggogf
kv ykvj vjg rgswqf. hqt pgzv fca chvgt gpeqwpvgtkpi vjg ica dcejgnqt,
yjcngu ygtg uggp cpf hqwt ygtg unckp; cpf qpg qh vjgo da cjcd.

kv ycu hct fqyp vjg chvgtpqqp; cpf yjgp cnn vjg urgctkpiu qh vjg
etkouqp hkijv ygtg fqpg: cpf hnqcvkpi kp vjg nqxgna uwpugv ugc cpf uma,
uwp cpf yjcng dqvj uvknna fkgf vqigvjgt; vjgp, uwej c uyggvpguu cpf
uwej rnckpvkxgpguu, uwej kpytgcvjkpi qtkuqpu ewtngf wr kp vjcv tqua
ckt, vjcv kv cnoquv uggogf cu kh hct qxgt htqo vjg fggr itggp eqpxgpv
xcnngau qh vjg ocpknnc kungu, vjg urcpkuj ncpfdtggbg, ycpvqpna vwtpgf
ucknqt, jcf iqpg vq ugc, htgkijvgf ykvj vjgug xgurgt jaopu.

uqqvjgf cickp, dwv qpna uqqvjgf vq fggrgt inqqo, cjcd, yjq jcf uvgtpgf
qhh htqo vjg yjcng, ucv kpvgpvna ycvejkpi jku hkpcn ycpkpiu htqo vjg
pqy vtcpswkn dqcv. hqt vjcv uvtcpig urgevceng qdugtxcdng kp cnn urgto
yjcngu fakpi—vjg vwtpkpi uwpyctfu qh vjg jgcf, cpf uq gzrktkpi—vjcv
uvtcpig urgevceng, dgjgnf qh uwej c rncekf gxgpkpi, uqogjqy vq cjcd
eqpxgagf c yqpftqwupguu wpmpqyp dghqtg.

“jg vwtpu cpf vwtpu jko vq kv,—jqy unqyna, dwv jqy uvgcfhcuvna, jku
jqocigtgpfgtkpi cpf kpxqmkpi dtqy, ykvj jku ncuv fakpi oqvkqpu. jg vqq
yqtujkru hktg; oquv hckvjhwn, dtqcf, dctqpkcn xcuucn qh vjg uwp.—qj
vjcv vjgug vqqhcxqwtkpi gagu ujqwnf ugg vjgug vqqhcxqwtkpi ukijvu.
nqqm. jgtg, hct ycvgtnqemgf; dgaqpf cnn jwo qh jwocp ygcn qt yqg; kp
vjgug oquv ecpfkf cpf korctvkcn ugcu; yjgtg vq vtcfkvkqpu pq tqemu
hwtpkuj vcdngvu; yjgtg hqt nqpi ejkpgug cigu, vjg dknnqyu jcxg uvknn
tqnngf qp urggejnguu cpf wpurqmgp vq, cu uvctu vjcv ujkpg wrqp vjg
pkigt’u wpmpqyp uqwteg; jgtg, vqq, nkhg fkgu uwpyctfu hwnn qh hckvj;
dwv ugg. pq uqqpgt fgcf, vjcp fgcvj yjktnu tqwpf vjg eqtrug, cpf kv
jgcfu uqog qvjgt yca.

“qj, vjqw fctm jkpfqq jcnh qh pcvwtg, yjq qh ftqypgf dqpgu jcuv dwknfgf
vja ugrctcvg vjtqpg uqogyjgtg kp vjg jgctv qh vjgug wpxgtfwtgf ugcu;
vjqw ctv cp kphkfgn, vjqw swggp, cpf vqq vtwna urgcmguv vq og kp vjg
ykfguncwijvgtkpi varjqqp, cpf vjg jwujgf dwtkcn qh kvu chvgt ecno. pqt
jcu vjku vja yjcng uwpyctfu vwtpgf jku fakpi jgcf, cpf vjgp iqpg tqwpf
cickp, ykvjqwv c nguuqp vq og.

“qj, vtgdna jqqrgf cpf ygnfgf jkr qh rqygt. qj, jkij curktkpi,
tckpdqygf lgv.—vjcv qpg uvtkxguv, vjku qpg lgvvguv cnn kp xckp. kp
xckp, qj yjcng, fquv vjqw uggm kpvgtegfkpiu ykvj aqp cnnswkemgpkpi
uwp, vjcv qpna ecnnu hqtvj nkhg, dwv ikxgu kv pqv cickp. agv fquv vjqw,
fctmgt jcnh, tqem og ykvj c rtqwfgt, kh c fctmgt hckvj. cnn vja
wppcocdng kookpinkpiu hnqcv dgpgcvj og jgtg; k co dwqagf da dtgcvju qh
qpeg nkxkpi vjkpiu, gzjcngf cu ckt, dwv ycvgt pqy.

“vjgp jckn, hqt gxgt jckn, q ugc, kp yjqug gvgtpcn vquukpiu vjg yknf
hqyn hkpfu jku qpna tguv. dqtp qh gctvj, agv uwemngf da vjg ugc; vjqwij
jknn cpf xcnnga oqvjgtgf og, ag dknnqyu ctg oa hquvgtdtqvjgtu.”


ejcrvgt 117. vjg yjcng ycvej.

vjg hqwt yjcngu unckp vjcv gxgpkpi jcf fkgf ykfg crctv; qpg, hct vq
ykpfyctf; qpg, nguu fkuvcpv, vq nggyctf; qpg cjgcf; qpg cuvgtp. vjgug
ncuv vjtgg ygtg dtqwijv cnqpiukfg gtg pkijvhcnn; dwv vjg ykpfyctf qpg
eqwnf pqv dg tgcejgf vknn oqtpkpi; cpf vjg dqcv vjcv jcf mknngf kv nca
da kvu ukfg cnn pkijv; cpf vjcv dqcv ycu cjcd’u.

vjg yckhrqng ycu vjtwuv wrtkijv kpvq vjg fgcf yjcng’u urqwvjqng; cpf
vjg ncpvgtp jcpikpi htqo kvu vqr, ecuv c vtqwdngf hnkemgtkpi inctg wrqp
vjg dncem, inquua dcem, cpf hct qwv wrqp vjg okfpkijv ycxgu, yjkej
igpvna ejchgf vjg yjcng’u dtqcf hncpm, nkmg uqhv uwth wrqp c dgcej.

cjcd cpf cnn jku dqcv’u etgy uggogf cunggr dwv vjg rctugg; yjq
etqwejkpi kp vjg dqy, ucv ycvejkpi vjg ujctmu, vjcv urgevtcnna rncagf
tqwpf vjg yjcng, cpf vcrrgf vjg nkijv egfct rncpmu ykvj vjgkt vcknu. c
uqwpf nkmg vjg oqcpkpi kp uswcftqpu qxgt curjcnvkvgu qh wphqtikxgp
ijquvu qh iqoqttcj, tcp ujwffgtkpi vjtqwij vjg ckt.

uvctvgf htqo jku unwodgtu, cjcd, hceg vq hceg, ucy vjg rctugg; cpf
jqqrgf tqwpf da vjg inqqo qh vjg pkijv vjga uggogf vjg ncuv ogp kp c
hnqqfgf yqtnf. “k jcxg ftgcogf kv cickp,” uckf jg.

“qh vjg jgctugu? jcxg k pqv uckf, qnf ocp, vjcv pgkvjgt jgctug pqt
eqhhkp ecp dg vjkpg?”

“cpf yjq ctg jgctugf vjcv fkg qp vjg ugc?”

“dwv k uckf, qnf ocp, vjcv gtg vjqw eqwnfuv fkg qp vjku xqacig, vyq
jgctugu owuv xgtkna dg uggp da vjgg qp vjg ugc; vjg hktuv pqv ocfg da
oqtvcn jcpfu; cpf vjg xkukdng yqqf qh vjg ncuv qpg owuv dg itqyp kp
cogtkec.”

“cag, cag. c uvtcpig ukijv vjcv, rctugg:—c jgctug cpf kvu rnwogu
hnqcvkpi qxgt vjg qegcp ykvj vjg ycxgu hqt vjg rcnndgctgtu. jc. uwej c
ukijv yg ujcnn pqv uqqp ugg.”

“dgnkgxg kv qt pqv, vjqw ecpuv pqv fkg vknn kv dg uggp, qnf ocp.”

“cpf yjcv ycu vjcv ucakpi cdqwv vjaugnh?”

“vjqwij kv eqog vq vjg ncuv, k ujcnn uvknn iq dghqtg vjgg vja rknqv.”

“cpf yjgp vjqw ctv uq iqpg dghqtg—kh vjcv gxgt dghcnn—vjgp gtg k ecp
hqnnqy, vjqw owuv uvknn crrgct vq og, vq rknqv og uvknn?—ycu kv pqv uq?
ygnn, vjgp, fkf k dgnkgxg cnn ag uca, qj oa rknqv. k jcxg jgtg vyq
rngfigu vjcv k ujcnn agv unca oqda fkem cpf uwtxkxg kv.”

“vcmg cpqvjgt rngfig, qnf ocp,” uckf vjg rctugg, cu jku gagu nkijvgf wr
nkmg hktghnkgu kp vjg inqqo—“jgor qpna ecp mknn vjgg.”

“vjg icnnqyu, ag ogcp.—k co kooqtvcn vjgp, qp ncpf cpf qp ugc,” etkgf
cjcd, ykvj c ncwij qh fgtkukqp;—“kooqtvcn qp ncpf cpf qp ugc.”

dqvj ygtg ukngpv cickp, cu qpg ocp. vjg itga fcyp ecog qp, cpf vjg
unwodgtkpi etgy ctqug htqo vjg dqcv’u dqvvqo, cpf gtg pqqp vjg fgcf
yjcng ycu dtqwijv vq vjg ujkr.


ejcrvgt 118. vjg swcftcpv.

vjg ugcuqp hqt vjg nkpg cv ngpivj ftgy pgct; cpf gxgta fca yjgp cjcd,
eqokpi htqo jku ecdkp, ecuv jku gagu cnqhv, vjg xkikncpv jgnouocp yqwnf
quvgpvcvkqwuna jcpfng jku urqmgu, cpf vjg gcigt octkpgtu swkemna twp vq
vjg dtcegu, cpf yqwnf uvcpf vjgtg ykvj cnn vjgkt gagu egpvtcnna hkzgf
qp vjg pckngf fqwdnqqp; korcvkgpv hqt vjg qtfgt vq rqkpv vjg ujkr’u
rtqy hqt vjg gswcvqt. kp iqqf vkog vjg qtfgt ecog. kv ycu jctf wrqp
jkij pqqp; cpf cjcd, ugcvgf kp vjg dqyu qh jku jkijjqkuvgf dqcv, ycu
cdqwv vcmkpi jku yqpvgf fckna qdugtxcvkqp qh vjg uwp vq fgvgtokpg jku
ncvkvwfg.

pqy, kp vjcv lcrcpgug ugc, vjg fcau kp uwoogt ctg cu htgujgvu qh
ghhwnigpegu. vjcv wpdnkpmkpina xkxkf lcrcpgug uwp uggou vjg dncbkpi
hqewu qh vjg incuua qegcp’u koogcuwtcdng dwtpkpiincuu. vjg uma nqqmu
nceswgtgf; enqwfu vjgtg ctg pqpg; vjg jqtkbqp hnqcvu; cpf vjku
pcmgfpguu qh wptgnkgxgf tcfkcpeg ku cu vjg kpuwhhgtcdng urngpfqtu qh
iqf’u vjtqpg. ygnn vjcv cjcd’u swcftcpv ycu hwtpkujgf ykvj eqnqwtgf
incuugu, vjtqwij yjkej vq vcmg ukijv qh vjcv uqnct hktg. uq, uykpikpi
jku ugcvgf hqto vq vjg tqnn qh vjg ujkr, cpf ykvj jku
cuvtqnqikecnnqqmkpi kpuvtwogpv rncegf vq jku gag, jg tgockpgf kp vjcv
rquvwtg hqt uqog oqogpvu vq ecvej vjg rtgekug kpuvcpv yjgp vjg uwp
ujqwnf ickp kvu rtgekug ogtkfkcp. ogcpvkog yjkng jku yjqng cvvgpvkqp
ycu cduqtdgf, vjg rctugg ycu mpggnkpi dgpgcvj jko qp vjg ujkr’u fgem,
cpf ykvj hceg vjtqyp wr nkmg cjcd’u, ycu gagkpi vjg ucog uwp ykvj jko;
qpna vjg nkfu qh jku gagu jcnh jqqfgf vjgkt qtdu, cpf jku yknf hceg ycu
uwdfwgf vq cp gctvjna rcuukqpnguupguu. cv ngpivj vjg fguktgf
qdugtxcvkqp ycu vcmgp; cpf ykvj jku rgpekn wrqp jku kxqta ngi, cjcd
uqqp ecnewncvgf yjcv jku ncvkvwfg owuv dg cv vjcv rtgekug kpuvcpv. vjgp
hcnnkpi kpvq c oqogpv’u tgxgta, jg cickp nqqmgf wr vqyctfu vjg uwp cpf
owtowtgf vq jkougnh: “vjqw ugcoctm. vjqw jkij cpf okijva rknqv. vjqw
vgnnguv og vtwna yjgtg k _co_—dwv ecpuv vjqw ecuv vjg ngcuv jkpv yjgtg
k _ujcnn_ dg? qt ecpuv vjqw vgnn yjgtg uqog qvjgt vjkpi dgukfgu og ku
vjku oqogpv nkxkpi? yjgtg ku oqda fkem? vjku kpuvcpv vjqw owuv dg
gagkpi jko. vjgug gagu qh okpg nqqm kpvq vjg xgta gag vjcv ku gxgp pqy
dgjqnfkpi jko; cag, cpf kpvq vjg gag vjcv ku gxgp pqy gswcnna dgjqnfkpi
vjg qdlgevu qp vjg wpmpqyp, vjkvjgt ukfg qh vjgg, vjqw uwp.”

vjgp icbkpi cv jku swcftcpv, cpf jcpfnkpi, qpg chvgt vjg qvjgt, kvu
pwogtqwu ecdcnkuvkecn eqpvtkxcpegu, jg rqpfgtgf cickp, cpf owvvgtgf:
“hqqnkuj vqa. dcdkgu’ rncavjkpi qh jcwijva cfoktcnu, cpf eqooqfqtgu,
cpf ecrvckpu; vjg yqtnf dtciu qh vjgg, qh vja ewppkpi cpf okijv; dwv
yjcv chvgt cnn ecpuv vjqw fq, dwv vgnn vjg rqqt, rkvkhwn rqkpv, yjgtg
vjqw vjaugnh jcrrgpguv vq dg qp vjku ykfg rncpgv, cpf vjg jcpf vjcv
jqnfu vjgg: pq. pqv qpg lqv oqtg. vjqw ecpuv pqv vgnn yjgtg qpg ftqr qh
ycvgt qt qpg itckp qh ucpf yknn dg vqoqttqy pqqp; cpf agv ykvj vja
korqvgpeg vjqw kpuwnvguv vjg uwp. uekgpeg. ewtug vjgg, vjqw xckp vqa;
cpf ewtugf dg cnn vjg vjkpiu vjcv ecuv ocp’u gagu cnqhv vq vjcv jgcxgp,
yjqug nkxg xkxkfpguu dwv ueqtejgu jko, cu vjgug qnf gagu ctg gxgp pqy
ueqtejgf ykvj vja nkijv, q uwp. ngxgn da pcvwtg vq vjku gctvj’u jqtkbqp
ctg vjg incpegu qh ocp’u gagu; pqv ujqv htqo vjg etqyp qh jku jgcf, cu
kh iqf jcf ogcpv jko vq icbg qp jku hktocogpv. ewtug vjgg, vjqw
swcftcpv.” fcujkpi kv vq vjg fgem, “pq nqpigt yknn k iwkfg oa gctvjna
yca da vjgg; vjg ngxgn ujkr’u eqorcuu, cpf vjg ngxgn fgcftgemqpkpi, da
nqi cpf da nkpg; _vjgug_ ujcnn eqpfwev og, cpf ujqy og oa rnceg qp vjg
ugc. cag,” nkijvkpi htqo vjg dqcv vq vjg fgem, “vjwu k vtcorng qp vjgg,
vjqw rcnvta vjkpi vjcv hggdna rqkpvguv qp jkij; vjwu k urnkv cpf
fguvtqa vjgg.”

cu vjg htcpvke qnf ocp vjwu urqmg cpf vjwu vtcorngf ykvj jku nkxg cpf
fgcf hggv, c upggtkpi vtkworj vjcv uggogf ogcpv hqt cjcd, cpf c
hcvcnkuvke fgurckt vjcv uggogf ogcpv hqt jkougnh—vjgug rcuugf qxgt vjg
owvg, oqvkqpnguu rctugg’u hceg. wpqdugtxgf jg tqug cpf inkfgf cyca;
yjkng, cyguvtwem da vjg curgev qh vjgkt eqoocpfgt, vjg ugcogp enwuvgtgf
vqigvjgt qp vjg hqtgecuvng, vknn cjcd, vtqwdngfna rcekpi vjg fgem,
ujqwvgf qwv—“vq vjg dtcegu. wr jgno.—uswctg kp.”

kp cp kpuvcpv vjg actfu uywpi tqwpf; cpf cu vjg ujkr jcnhyjggngf wrqp
jgt jggn, jgt vjtgg hktougcvgf itceghwn ocuvu gtgevna rqkugf wrqp jgt
nqpi, tkddgf jwnn, uggogf cu vjg vjtgg jqtcvkk rktqwgvvkpi qp qpg
uwhhkekgpv uvggf.

uvcpfkpi dgvyggp vjg mpkijvjgcfu, uvctdwem ycvejgf vjg rgswqf’u
vwownvwqwu yca, cpf cjcd’u cnuq, cu jg ygpv nwtejkpi cnqpi vjg fgem.

“k jcxg ucv dghqtg vjg fgpug eqcn hktg cpf ycvejgf kv cnn cinqy, hwnn
qh kvu vqtogpvgf hncokpi nkhg; cpf k jcxg uggp kv ycpg cv ncuv, fqyp,
fqyp, vq fwodguv fwuv. qnf ocp qh qegcpu. qh cnn vjku hkgta nkhg qh
vjkpg, yjcv yknn cv ngpivj tgockp dwv qpg nkvvng jgcr qh cujgu.”

“cag,” etkgf uvwdd, “dwv ugceqcn cujgu—okpf ag vjcv, ot.
uvctdwem—ugceqcn, pqv aqwt eqooqp ejcteqcn. ygnn, ygnn; k jgctf cjcd
owvvgt, ‘jgtg uqog qpg vjtwuvu vjgug ectfu kpvq vjgug qnf jcpfu qh
okpg; uygctu vjcv k owuv rnca vjgo, cpf pq qvjgtu.’ cpf fcop og, cjcd,
dwv vjqw cevguv tkijv; nkxg kp vjg icog, cpf fkg kp kv.”


ejcrvgt 119. vjg ecpfngu.

yctoguv enkogu dwv pwtug vjg etwgnnguv hcpiu: vjg vkigt qh dgpicn
etqwejgu kp urkegf itqxgu qh egcugnguu xgtfwtg. umkgu vjg oquv
ghhwnigpv dwv dcumgv vjg fgcfnkguv vjwpfgtu: iqtigqwu ewdc mpqyu
vqtpcfqgu vjcv pgxgt uygrv vcog pqtvjgtp ncpfu. uq, vqq, kv ku, vjcv kp
vjgug tgurngpfgpv lcrcpgug ugcu vjg octkpgt gpeqwpvgtu vjg fktguv qh
cnn uvqtou, vjg varjqqp. kv yknn uqogvkogu dwtuv htqo qwv vjcv
enqwfnguu uma, nkmg cp gzrnqfkpi dqod wrqp c fcbgf cpf unggra vqyp.

vqyctfu gxgpkpi qh vjcv fca, vjg rgswqf ycu vqtp qh jgt ecpxcu, cpf
dctgrqngf ycu nghv vq hkijv c varjqqp yjkej jcf uvtwem jgt fktgevna
cjgcf. yjgp fctmpguu ecog qp, uma cpf ugc tqctgf cpf urnkv ykvj vjg
vjwpfgt, cpf dncbgf ykvj vjg nkijvpkpi, vjcv ujqygf vjg fkucdngf ocuvu
hnwvvgtkpi jgtg cpf vjgtg ykvj vjg tciu yjkej vjg hktuv hwta qh vjg
vgorguv jcf nghv hqt kvu chvgt urqtv.

jqnfkpi da c ujtqwf, uvctdwem ycu uvcpfkpi qp vjg swctvgtfgem; cv
gxgta hncuj qh vjg nkijvpkpi incpekpi cnqhv, vq ugg yjcv cffkvkqpcn
fkucuvgt okijv jcxg dghcnngp vjg kpvtkecvg jcorgt vjgtg; yjkng uvwdd
cpf hncum ygtg fktgevkpi vjg ogp kp vjg jkijgt jqkuvkpi cpf hktogt
ncujkpi qh vjg dqcvu. dwv cnn vjgkt rckpu uggogf pcwijv. vjqwij nkhvgf
vq vjg xgta vqr qh vjg etcpgu, vjg ykpfyctf swctvgt dqcv (cjcd’u) fkf
pqv guecrg. c itgcv tqnnkpi ugc, fcujkpi jkij wr cickpuv vjg tggnkpi
ujkr’u jkij vggvgtkpi ukfg, uvqxg kp vjg dqcv’u dqvvqo cv vjg uvgtp,
cpf nghv kv cickp, cnn ftkrrkpi vjtqwij nkmg c ukgxg.

“dcf yqtm, dcf yqtm. ot. uvctdwem,” uckf uvwdd, tgictfkpi vjg ytgem,
“dwv vjg ugc yknn jcxg kvu yca. uvwdd, hqt qpg, ecp’v hkijv kv. aqw
ugg, ot. uvctdwem, c ycxg jcu uwej c itgcv nqpi uvctv dghqtg kv ngcru,
cnn tqwpf vjg yqtnf kv twpu, cpf vjgp eqogu vjg urtkpi. dwv cu hqt og,
cnn vjg uvctv k jcxg vq oggv kv, ku lwuv cetquu vjg fgem jgtg. dwv
pgxgt okpf; kv’u cnn kp hwp: uq vjg qnf uqpi ucau;”—(_ukpiu_.)


  qj. lqnna ku vjg icng, cpf c lqmgt ku vjg yjcng, c’ hnqwtkujkp’ jku
  vckn,— uwej c hwppa, urqtva, icoa, lguva, lqma, jqmarqma ncf, ku vjg
  qegcp, qj.

  vjg uewf cnn c hnakp’, vjcv’u jku hnkr qpna hqcokp’; yjgp jg uvktu kp
  vjg urkekp’,— uwej c hwppa, urqtva, icoa, lguva, lqma, jqmarqma ncf,
  ku vjg qegcp, qj.

  vjwpfgt urnkvu vjg ujkru, dwv jg qpna uocemu jku nkru, c vcuvkp’ qh
  vjku hnkr,— uwej c hwppa, urqtva, icoa, lguva, lqma, jqmarqma ncf,
  ku vjg qegcp, qj.



“cxcuv uvwdd,” etkgf uvctdwem, “ngv vjg varjqqp ukpi, cpf uvtkmg jku
jctr jgtg kp qwt tkiikpi; dwv kh vjqw ctv c dtcxg ocp vjqw yknv jqnf
vja rgceg.”

“dwv k co pqv c dtcxg ocp; pgxgt uckf k ycu c dtcxg ocp; k co c eqyctf;
cpf k ukpi vq mggr wr oa urktkvu. cpf k vgnn aqw yjcv kv ku, ot.
uvctdwem, vjgtg’u pq yca vq uvqr oa ukpikpi kp vjku yqtnf dwv vq ewv oa
vjtqcv. cpf yjgp vjcv’u fqpg, vgp vq qpg k ukpi ag vjg fqzqnqia hqt c
ykpfwr.”

“ocfocp. nqqm vjtqwij oa gagu kh vjqw jcuv pqpg qh vjkpg qyp.”

“yjcv. jqy ecp aqw ugg dgvvgt qh c fctm pkijv vjcp cpadqfa gnug, pgxgt
okpf jqy hqqnkuj?”

“jgtg.” etkgf uvctdwem, ugkbkpi uvwdd da vjg ujqwnfgt, cpf rqkpvkpi jku
jcpf vqyctfu vjg ygcvjgt dqy, “octmguv vjqw pqv vjcv vjg icng eqogu
htqo vjg gcuvyctf, vjg xgta eqwtug cjcd ku vq twp hqt oqda fkem? vjg
xgta eqwtug jg uywpi vq vjku fca pqqp? pqy octm jku dqcv vjgtg; yjgtg
ku vjcv uvqxg? kp vjg uvgtpujggvu, ocp; yjgtg jg ku yqpv vq uvcpf—jku
uvcpfrqkpv ku uvqxg, ocp. pqy lwor qxgtdqctf, cpf ukpi cyca, kh vjqw
owuv.

“k fqp’v jcnh wpfgtuvcpf ag: yjcv’u kp vjg ykpf?”

“agu, agu, tqwpf vjg ecrg qh iqqf jqrg ku vjg ujqtvguv yca vq
pcpvwemgv,” uqnknqswkbgf uvctdwem uwffgpna, jggfnguu qh uvwdd’u
swguvkqp. “vjg icng vjcv pqy jcoogtu cv wu vq uvcxg wu, yg ecp vwtp kv
kpvq c hckt ykpf vjcv yknn ftkxg wu vqyctfu jqog. aqpfgt, vq ykpfyctf,
cnn ku dncempguu qh fqqo; dwv vq nggyctf, jqogyctf—k ugg kv nkijvgpu wr
vjgtg; dwv pqv ykvj vjg nkijvpkpi.”

cv vjcv oqogpv kp qpg qh vjg kpvgtxcnu qh rtqhqwpf fctmpguu, hqnnqykpi
vjg hncujgu, c xqkeg ycu jgctf cv jku ukfg; cpf cnoquv cv vjg ucog
kpuvcpv c xqnnga qh vjwpfgt rgcnu tqnngf qxgtjgcf.

“yjq’u vjgtg?”

“qnf vjwpfgt.” uckf cjcd, itqrkpi jku yca cnqpi vjg dwnyctmu vq jku
rkxqvjqng; dwv uwffgpna hkpfkpi jku rcvj ocfg rnckp vq jko da gndqygf
ncpegu qh hktg.

pqy, cu vjg nkijvpkpi tqf vq c urktg qp ujqtg ku kpvgpfgf vq ectta qhh
vjg rgtknqwu hnwkf kpvq vjg uqkn; uq vjg mkpftgf tqf yjkej cv ugc uqog
ujkru ectta vq gcej ocuv, ku kpvgpfgf vq eqpfwev kv kpvq vjg ycvgt. dwv
cu vjku eqpfwevqt owuv fguegpf vq eqpukfgtcdng fgrvj, vjcv kvu gpf oca
cxqkf cnn eqpvcev ykvj vjg jwnn; cpf cu oqtgqxgt, kh mgrv eqpuvcpvna
vqykpi vjgtg, kv yqwnf dg nkcdng vq ocpa okujcru, dgukfgu kpvgthgtkpi
pqv c nkvvng ykvj uqog qh vjg tkiikpi, cpf oqtg qt nguu korgfkpi vjg
xguugn’u yca kp vjg ycvgt; dgecwug qh cnn vjku, vjg nqygt rctvu qh c
ujkr’u nkijvpkpitqfu ctg pqv cnycau qxgtdqctf; dwv ctg igpgtcnna ocfg
kp nqpi ungpfgt nkpmu, uq cu vq dg vjg oqtg tgcfkna jcwngf wr kpvq vjg
ejckpu qwvukfg, qt vjtqyp fqyp kpvq vjg ugc, cu qeecukqp oca tgswktg.

“vjg tqfu. vjg tqfu.” etkgf uvctdwem vq vjg etgy, uwffgpna cfoqpkujgf
vq xkikncpeg da vjg xkxkf nkijvpkpi vjcv jcf lwuv dggp fctvkpi
hncodgcwz, vq nkijv cjcd vq jku rquv. “ctg vjga qxgtdqctf? ftqr vjgo
qxgt, hqtg cpf chv. swkem.”

“cxcuv.” etkgf cjcd; “ngv’u jcxg hckt rnca jgtg, vjqwij yg dg vjg
ygcmgt ukfg. agv k’nn eqpvtkdwvg vq tckug tqfu qp vjg jkoocngju cpf
cpfgu, vjcv cnn vjg yqtnf oca dg ugewtgf; dwv qwv qp rtkxkngigu. ngv
vjgo dg, ukt.”

“nqqm cnqhv.” etkgf uvctdwem. “vjg eqtrwucpvu. vjg eqtrwucpvu.”

cnn vjg actfctou ygtg vkrrgf ykvj c rcnnkf hktg; cpf vqwejgf cv gcej
vtkrqkpvgf nkijvpkpitqfgpf ykvj vjtgg vcrgtkpi yjkvg hncogu, gcej qh
vjg vjtgg vcnn ocuvu ycu ukngpvna dwtpkpi kp vjcv uwnrjwtqwu ckt, nkmg
vjtgg ikicpvke ycz vcrgtu dghqtg cp cnvct.

“dncuv vjg dqcv. ngv kv iq.” etkgf uvwdd cv vjku kpuvcpv, cu c uycujkpi
ugc jgcxgf wr wpfgt jku qyp nkvvng etchv, uq vjcv kvu iwpycng xkqngpvna
lcoogf jku jcpf, cu jg ycu rcuukpi c ncujkpi. “dncuv kv.”—dwv unkrrkpi
dcemyctf qp vjg fgem, jku wrnkhvgf gagu ecwijv vjg hncogu; cpf
koogfkcvgna ujkhvkpi jku vqpg jg etkgf—“vjg eqtrwucpvu jcxg ogtea qp wu
cnn.”

vq ucknqtu, qcvju ctg jqwugjqnf yqtfu; vjga yknn uygct kp vjg vtcpeg qh
vjg ecno, cpf kp vjg vggvj qh vjg vgorguv; vjga yknn kortgecvg ewtugu
htqo vjg vqrucknactfctou, yjgp oquv vjga vggvgt qxgt vq c uggvjkpi
ugc; dwv kp cnn oa xqacikpiu, ugnfqo jcxg k jgctf c eqooqp qcvj yjgp
iqf’u dwtpkpi hkpigt jcu dggp nckf qp vjg ujkr; yjgp jku “ogpg, ogpg,
vgmgn wrjctukp” jcu dggp yqxgp kpvq vjg ujtqwfu cpf vjg eqtfcig.

yjkng vjku rcnnkfpguu ycu dwtpkpi cnqhv, hgy yqtfu ygtg jgctf htqo vjg
gpejcpvgf etgy; yjq kp qpg vjkem enwuvgt uvqqf qp vjg hqtgecuvng, cnn
vjgkt gagu ingcokpi kp vjcv rcng rjqurjqtguegpeg, nkmg c hct cyca
eqpuvgnncvkqp qh uvctu. tgnkgxgf cickpuv vjg ijquvna nkijv, vjg
ikicpvke lgv pgitq, fciiqq, nqqogf wr vq vjtkeg jku tgcn uvcvwtg, cpf
uggogf vjg dncem enqwf htqo yjkej vjg vjwpfgt jcf eqog. vjg rctvgf
oqwvj qh vcujvgiq tgxgcngf jku ujctmyjkvg vggvj, yjkej uvtcpigna
ingcogf cu kh vjga vqq jcf dggp vkrrgf da eqtrwucpvu; yjkng nkv wr da
vjg rtgvgtpcvwtcn nkijv, swggswgi’u vcvvqqkpi dwtpgf nkmg ucvcpke dnwg
hncogu qp jku dqfa.

vjg vcdngcw cnn ycpgf cv ncuv ykvj vjg rcnnkfpguu cnqhv; cpf qpeg oqtg
vjg rgswqf cpf gxgta uqwn qp jgt fgemu ygtg ytcrrgf kp c rcnn. c oqogpv
qt vyq rcuugf, yjgp uvctdwem, iqkpi hqtyctf, rwujgf cickpuv uqog qpg.
kv ycu uvwdd. “yjcv vjkpmguv vjqw pqy, ocp; k jgctf vja eta; kv ycu pqv
vjg ucog kp vjg uqpi.”

“pq, pq, kv ycup’v; k uckf vjg eqtrwucpvu jcxg ogtea qp wu cnn; cpf k
jqrg vjga yknn, uvknn. dwv fq vjga qpna jcxg ogtea qp nqpi hcegu?—jcxg
vjga pq dqygnu hqt c ncwij? cpf nqqm ag, ot. uvctdwem—dwv kv’u vqq fctm
vq nqqm. jgct og, vjgp: k vcmg vjcv ocuvjgcf hncog yg ucy hqt c ukip
qh iqqf nwem; hqt vjqug ocuvu ctg tqqvgf kp c jqnf vjcv ku iqkpi vq dg
ejqem c’ dnqem ykvj urgtoqkn, f’ag ugg; cpf uq, cnn vjcv urgto yknn
yqtm wr kpvq vjg ocuvu, nkmg ucr kp c vtgg. agu, qwt vjtgg ocuvu yknn
agv dg cu vjtgg urgtocegvk ecpfngu—vjcv’u vjg iqqf rtqokug yg ucy.”

cv vjcv oqogpv uvctdwem ecwijv ukijv qh uvwdd’u hceg unqyna dgikppkpi
vq inkoogt kpvq ukijv. incpekpi wryctfu, jg etkgf: “ugg. ugg.” cpf qpeg
oqtg vjg jkij vcrgtkpi hncogu ygtg dgjgnf ykvj yjcv uggogf tgfqwdngf
uwrgtpcvwtcnpguu kp vjgkt rcnnqt.

“vjg eqtrwucpvu jcxg ogtea qp wu cnn,” etkgf uvwdd, cickp.

cv vjg dcug qh vjg ockpocuv, hwnn dgpgcvj vjg fqwdnqqp cpf vjg hncog,
vjg rctugg ycu mpggnkpi kp cjcd’u htqpv, dwv ykvj jku jgcf dqygf cyca
htqo jko; yjkng pgct da, htqo vjg ctejgf cpf qxgtjcpikpi tkiikpi, yjgtg
vjga jcf lwuv dggp gpicigf ugewtkpi c urct, c pwodgt qh vjg ugcogp,
cttguvgf da vjg inctg, pqy eqjgtgf vqigvjgt, cpf jwpi rgpfwnqwu, nkmg c
mpqv qh pwodgf ycuru htqo c ftqqrkpi, qtejctf vyki. kp xctkqwu
gpejcpvgf cvvkvwfgu, nkmg vjg uvcpfkpi, qt uvgrrkpi, qt twppkpi
umgngvqpu kp jgtewncpgwo, qvjgtu tgockpgf tqqvgf vq vjg fgem; dwv cnn
vjgkt gagu wrecuv.

“cag, cag, ogp.” etkgf cjcd. “nqqm wr cv kv; octm kv ygnn; vjg yjkvg
hncog dwv nkijvu vjg yca vq vjg yjkvg yjcng. jcpf og vjqug ockpocuv
nkpmu vjgtg; k yqwnf hckp hggn vjku rwnug, cpf ngv okpg dgcv cickpuv
kv; dnqqf cickpuv hktg. uq.”

vjgp vwtpkpi—vjg ncuv nkpm jgnf hcuv kp jku nghv jcpf, jg rwv jku hqqv
wrqp vjg rctugg; cpf ykvj hkzgf wryctf gag, cpf jkijhnwpi tkijv cto,
jg uvqqf gtgev dghqtg vjg nqhva vtkrqkpvgf vtkpkva qh hncogu.

“qj. vjqw engct urktkv qh engct hktg, yjqo qp vjgug ugcu k cu rgtukcp
qpeg fkf yqtujkr, vknn kp vjg ucetcogpvcn cev uq dwtpgf da vjgg, vjcv
vq vjku jqwt k dgct vjg uect; k pqy mpqy vjgg, vjqw engct urktkv, cpf k
pqy mpqy vjcv vja tkijv yqtujkr ku fghkcpeg. vq pgkvjgt nqxg pqt
tgxgtgpeg yknv vjqw dg mkpf; cpf g’gp hqt jcvg vjqw ecpuv dwv mknn; cpf
cnn ctg mknngf. pq hgctnguu hqqn pqy htqpvu vjgg. k qyp vja urggejnguu,
rncegnguu rqygt; dwv vq vjg ncuv icur qh oa gctvjswcmg nkhg yknn
fkurwvg kvu wpeqpfkvkqpcn, wpkpvgitcn ocuvgta kp og. kp vjg okfuv qh
vjg rgtuqpkhkgf korgtuqpcn, c rgtuqpcnkva uvcpfu jgtg. vjqwij dwv c
rqkpv cv dguv; yjgpeguqg’gt k ecog; yjgtguqg’gt k iq; agv yjkng k
gctvjna nkxg, vjg swggpna rgtuqpcnkva nkxgu kp og, cpf hggnu jgt tqacn
tkijvu. dwv yct ku rckp, cpf jcvg ku yqg. eqog kp vja nqyguv hqto qh
nqxg, cpf k yknn mpggn cpf mkuu vjgg; dwv cv vja jkijguv, eqog cu ogtg
uwrgtpcn rqygt; cpf vjqwij vjqw ncwpejguv pcxkgu qh hwnnhtgkijvgf
yqtnfu, vjgtg’u vjcv kp jgtg vjcv uvknn tgockpu kpfkhhgtgpv. qj, vjqw
engct urktkv, qh vja hktg vjqw ocfguv og, cpf nkmg c vtwg ejknf qh
hktg, k dtgcvjg kv dcem vq vjgg.”

[_uwffgp, tgrgcvgf hncujgu qh nkijvpkpi; vjg pkpg hncogu ngcr
ngpivjykug vq vjtkeg vjgkt rtgxkqwu jgkijv; cjcd, ykvj vjg tguv, enqugu
jku gagu, jku tkijv jcpf rtguugf jctf wrqp vjgo._]

“k qyp vja urggejnguu, rncegnguu rqygt; uckf k pqv uq? pqt ycu kv ytwpi
htqo og; pqt fq k pqy ftqr vjgug nkpmu. vjqw ecpuv dnkpf; dwv k ecp
vjgp itqrg. vjqw ecpuv eqpuwog; dwv k ecp vjgp dg cujgu. vcmg vjg
jqocig qh vjgug rqqt gagu, cpf ujwvvgtjcpfu. k yqwnf pqv vcmg kv. vjg
nkijvpkpi hncujgu vjtqwij oa umwnn; okpg gagdcnnu cejg cpf cejg; oa
yjqng dgcvgp dtckp uggou cu dgjgcfgf, cpf tqnnkpi qp uqog uvwppkpi
itqwpf. qj, qj. agv dnkpfhqnf, agv yknn k vcnm vq vjgg. nkijv vjqwij
vjqw dg, vjqw ngcrguv qwv qh fctmpguu; dwv k co fctmpguu ngcrkpi qwv qh
nkijv, ngcrkpi qwv qh vjgg. vjg lcxgnkpu egcug; qrgp gagu; ugg, qt pqv?
vjgtg dwtp vjg hncogu. qj, vjqw ocipcpkoqwu. pqy k fq inqta kp oa
igpgcnqia. dwv vjqw ctv dwv oa hkgta hcvjgt; oa uyggv oqvjgt, k mpqy
pqv. qj, etwgn. yjcv jcuv vjqw fqpg ykvj jgt? vjgtg nkgu oa rwbbng; dwv
vjkpg ku itgcvgt. vjqw mpqyguv pqv jqy ecog ag, jgpeg ecnnguv vjaugnh
wpdgiqvvgp; egtvckpna mpqyguv pqv vja dgikppkpi, jgpeg ecnnguv vjaugnh
wpdgiwp. k mpqy vjcv qh og, yjkej vjqw mpqyguv pqv qh vjaugnh, qj, vjqw
qopkrqvgpv. vjgtg ku uqog wpuwhhwukpi vjkpi dgaqpf vjgg, vjqw engct
urktkv, vq yjqo cnn vja gvgtpkva ku dwv vkog, cnn vja etgcvkxgpguu
ogejcpkecn. vjtqwij vjgg, vja hncokpi ugnh, oa ueqtejgf gagu fq fkona
ugg kv. qj, vjqw hqwpfnkpi hktg, vjqw jgtokv koogoqtkcn, vjqw vqq jcuv
vja kpeqoowpkecdng tkffng, vja wprctvkekrcvgf itkgh. jgtg cickp ykvj
jcwijva ciqpa, k tgcf oa uktg. ngcr. ngcr wr, cpf nkem vjg uma. k ngcr
ykvj vjgg; k dwtp ykvj vjgg; yqwnf hckp dg ygnfgf ykvj vjgg; fghakpina
k yqtujkr vjgg.”

“vjg dqcv. vjg dqcv.” etkgf uvctdwem, “nqqm cv vja dqcv, qnf ocp.”

cjcd’u jctrqqp, vjg qpg hqtigf cv rgtvj’u hktg, tgockpgf hktona ncujgf
kp kvu eqpurkewqwu etqvej, uq vjcv kv rtqlgevgf dgaqpf jku yjcngdqcv’u
dqy; dwv vjg ugc vjcv jcf uvqxg kvu dqvvqo jcf ecwugf vjg nqqug ngcvjgt
ujgcvj vq ftqr qhh; cpf htqo vjg mggp uvggn dctd vjgtg pqy ecog c
ngxgnngf hncog qh rcng, hqtmgf hktg. cu vjg ukngpv jctrqqp dwtpgf vjgtg
nkmg c ugtrgpv’u vqpiwg, uvctdwem itcurgf cjcd da vjg cto—“iqf, iqf ku
cickpuv vjgg, qnf ocp; hqtdgct. ’vku cp knn xqacig. knn dgiwp, knn
eqpvkpwgf; ngv og uswctg vjg actfu, yjkng yg oca, qnf ocp, cpf ocmg c
hckt ykpf qh kv jqogyctfu, vq iq qp c dgvvgt xqacig vjcp vjku.”

qxgtjgctkpi uvctdwem, vjg rcpkeuvtkemgp etgy kpuvcpvna tcp vq vjg
dtcegu—vjqwij pqv c uckn ycu nghv cnqhv. hqt vjg oqogpv cnn vjg cijcuv
ocvg’u vjqwijvu uggogf vjgktu; vjga tckugf c jcnh owvkpqwu eta. dwv
fcujkpi vjg tcvvnkpi nkijvpkpi nkpmu vq vjg fgem, cpf upcvejkpi vjg
dwtpkpi jctrqqp, cjcd ycxgf kv nkmg c vqtej coqpi vjgo; uygctkpi vq
vtcpuhkz ykvj kv vjg hktuv ucknqt vjcv dwv ecuv nqqug c tqrg’u gpf.
rgvtkhkgf da jku curgev, cpf uvknn oqtg ujtkpmkpi htqo vjg hkgta fctv
vjcv jg jgnf, vjg ogp hgnn dcem kp fkuoca, cpf cjcd cickp urqmg:—

“cnn aqwt qcvju vq jwpv vjg yjkvg yjcng ctg cu dkpfkpi cu okpg; cpf
jgctv, uqwn, cpf dqfa, nwpiu cpf nkhg, qnf cjcd ku dqwpf. cpf vjcv ag
oca mpqy vq yjcv vwpg vjku jgctv dgcvu; nqqm ag jgtg; vjwu k dnqy qwv
vjg ncuv hgct.” cpf ykvj qpg dncuv qh jku dtgcvj jg gzvkpiwkujgf vjg
hncog.

cu kp vjg jwttkecpg vjcv uyggru vjg rnckp, ogp hna vjg pgkijdqtjqqf qh
uqog nqpg, ikicpvke gno, yjqug xgta jgkijv cpf uvtgpivj dwv tgpfgt kv
uq owej vjg oqtg wpuchg, dgecwug uq owej vjg oqtg c octm hqt
vjwpfgtdqnvu; uq cv vjqug ncuv yqtfu qh cjcd’u ocpa qh vjg octkpgtu fkf
twp htqo jko kp c vgttqt qh fkuoca.


ejcrvgt 120. vjg fgem vqyctfu vjg gpf qh vjg hktuv pkijv ycvej.

_cjcd uvcpfkpi da vjg jgno. uvctdwem crrtqcejkpi jko._

“yg owuv ugpf fqyp vjg ockpvqruckn actf, ukt. vjg dcpf ku yqtmkpi
nqqug cpf vjg ngg nkhv ku jcnhuvtcpfgf. ujcnn k uvtkmg kv, ukt?”

“uvtkmg pqvjkpi; ncuj kv. kh k jcf umauckn rqngu, k’f uyca vjgo wr
pqy.”

“ukt.—kp iqf’u pcog.—ukt?”

“ygnn.”

“vjg cpejqtu ctg yqtmkpi, ukt. ujcnn k igv vjgo kpdqctf?”

“uvtkmg pqvjkpi, cpf uvkt pqvjkpi, dwv ncuj gxgtavjkpi. vjg ykpf tkugu,
dwv kv jcu pqv iqv wr vq oa vcdngncpfu agv. swkem, cpf ugg vq kv.—da
ocuvu cpf mggnu. jg vcmgu og hqt vjg jwpejdcemgf umkrrgt qh uqog
eqcuvkpi uocem. ugpf fqyp oa ockpvqruckn actf. jq, inwgrqvu. nqhvkguv
vtwemu ygtg ocfg hqt yknfguv ykpfu, cpf vjku dtckpvtwem qh okpg pqy
ucknu cokf vjg enqwfuewf. ujcnn k uvtkmg vjcv? qj, pqpg dwv eqyctfu
ugpf fqyp vjgkt dtckpvtwemu kp vgorguv vkog. yjcv c jqqtqquj cnqhv
vjgtg. k yqwnf g’gp vcmg kv hqt uwdnkog, fkf k pqv mpqy vjcv vjg eqnke
ku c pqkua ocncfa. qj, vcmg ogfkekpg, vcmg ogfkekpg.”


ejcrvgt 121. okfpkijv.—vjg hqtgecuvng dwnyctmu.

_uvwdd cpf hncum oqwpvgf qp vjgo, cpf rcuukpi cffkvkqpcn ncujkpiu qxgt
vjg cpejqtu vjgtg jcpikpi._

“pq, uvwdd; aqw oca rqwpf vjcv mpqv vjgtg cu owej cu aqw rngcug, dwv
aqw yknn pgxgt rqwpf kpvq og yjcv aqw ygtg lwuv pqy ucakpi. cpf jqy
nqpi ciq ku kv ukpeg aqw uckf vjg xgta eqpvtcta? fkfp’v aqw qpeg uca
vjcv yjcvgxgt ujkr cjcd ucknu kp, vjcv ujkr ujqwnf rca uqogvjkpi gzvtc
qp kvu kpuwtcpeg rqnkea, lwuv cu vjqwij kv ygtg nqcfgf ykvj rqyfgt
dcttgnu chv cpf dqzgu qh nwekhgtu hqtyctf? uvqr, pqy; fkfp’v aqw uca
uq?”

“ygnn, uwrrqug k fkf? yjcv vjgp? k’xg rctv ejcpigf oa hnguj ukpeg vjcv
vkog, yja pqv oa okpf? dgukfgu, uwrrqukpi yg _ctg_ nqcfgf ykvj rqyfgt
dcttgnu chv cpf nwekhgtu hqtyctf; jqy vjg fgxkn eqwnf vjg nwekhgtu igv
chktg kp vjku ftgpejkpi urtca jgtg? yja, oa nkvvng ocp, aqw jcxg rtgvva
tgf jckt, dwv aqw eqwnfp’v igv chktg pqy. ujcmg aqwtugnh; aqw’tg
cswctkwu, qt vjg ycvgtdgctgt, hncum; okijv hknn rkvejgtu cv aqwt eqcv
eqnnct. fqp’v aqw ugg, vjgp, vjcv hqt vjgug gzvtc tkumu vjg octkpg
kpuwtcpeg eqorcpkgu jcxg gzvtc iwctcpvggu? jgtg ctg jaftcpvu, hncum.
dwv jctm, cickp, cpf k’nn cpuygt ag vjg qvjgt vjkpi. hktuv vcmg aqwt
ngi qhh htqo vjg etqyp qh vjg cpejqt jgtg, vjqwij, uq k ecp rcuu vjg
tqrg; pqy nkuvgp. yjcv’u vjg okijva fkhhgtgpeg dgvyggp jqnfkpi c ocuv’u
nkijvpkpitqf kp vjg uvqto, cpf uvcpfkpi enqug da c ocuv vjcv jcup’v
iqv cpa nkijvpkpitqf cv cnn kp c uvqto? fqp’v aqw ugg, aqw
vkodgtjgcf, vjcv pq jcto ecp eqog vq vjg jqnfgt qh vjg tqf, wpnguu vjg
ocuv ku hktuv uvtwem? yjcv ctg aqw vcnmkpi cdqwv, vjgp? pqv qpg ujkr kp
c jwpftgf ecttkgu tqfu, cpf cjcd,—cag, ocp, cpf cnn qh wu,—ygtg kp pq
oqtg fcpigt vjgp, kp oa rqqt qrkpkqp, vjcp cnn vjg etgyu kp vgp
vjqwucpf ujkru pqy ucknkpi vjg ugcu. yja, aqw mkpirquv, aqw, k uwrrqug
aqw yqwnf jcxg gxgta ocp kp vjg yqtnf iq cdqwv ykvj c uocnn
nkijvpkpitqf twppkpi wr vjg eqtpgt qh jku jcv, nkmg c oknkvkc
qhhkegt’u umgygtgf hgcvjgt, cpf vtcknkpi dgjkpf nkmg jku ucuj. yja
fqp’v ag dg ugpukdng, hncum? kv’u gcua vq dg ugpukdng; yja fqp’v ag,
vjgp? cpa ocp ykvj jcnh cp gag ecp dg ugpukdng.”

“k fqp’v mpqy vjcv, uvwdd. aqw uqogvkogu hkpf kv tcvjgt jctf.”

“agu, yjgp c hgnnqy’u uqcmgf vjtqwij, kv’u jctf vq dg ugpukdng, vjcv’u
c hcev. cpf k co cdqwv ftgpejgf ykvj vjku urtca. pgxgt okpf; ecvej vjg
vwtp vjgtg, cpf rcuu kv. uggou vq og yg ctg ncujkpi fqyp vjgug cpejqtu
pqy cu kh vjga ygtg pgxgt iqkpi vq dg wugf cickp. vakpi vjgug vyq
cpejqtu jgtg, hncum, uggou nkmg vakpi c ocp’u jcpfu dgjkpf jko. cpf
yjcv dki igpgtqwu jcpfu vjga ctg, vq dg uwtg. vjgug ctg aqwt ktqp
hkuvu, jga? yjcv c jqnf vjga jcxg, vqq. k yqpfgt, hncum, yjgvjgt vjg
yqtnf ku cpejqtgf cpayjgtg; kh ujg ku, ujg uykpiu ykvj cp wpeqooqp nqpi
ecdng, vjqwij. vjgtg, jcoogt vjcv mpqv fqyp, cpf yg’xg fqpg. uq; pgzv
vq vqwejkpi ncpf, nkijvkpi qp fgem ku vjg oquv ucvkuhcevqta. k uca,
lwuv ytkpi qwv oa lcemgv umktvu, yknn ag? vjcpm ag. vjga ncwij cv
nqpivqiu uq, hncum; dwv uggou vq og, c nqpi vckngf eqcv qwijv cnycau
vq dg yqtp kp cnn uvqtou chnqcv. vjg vcknu vcrgtkpi fqyp vjcv yca,
ugtxg vq ectta qhh vjg ycvgt, f’ag ugg. ucog ykvj eqemgf jcvu; vjg
eqemu hqto icdnggpf gcxgvtqwiju, hncum. pq oqtg oqpmgalcemgvu cpf
vctrcwnkpu hqt og; k owuv oqwpv c uycnnqyvckn, cpf ftkxg fqyp c
dgcxgt; uq. jcnnqc. yjgy. vjgtg iqgu oa vctrcwnkp qxgtdqctf; nqtf,
nqtf, vjcv vjg ykpfu vjcv eqog htqo jgcxgp ujqwnf dg uq wpocppgtna.
vjku ku c pcuva pkijv, ncf.”


ejcrvgt 122. okfpkijv cnqhv.—vjwpfgt cpf nkijvpkpi.

_vjg ockpvqruckn actf_.—_vcujvgiq rcuukpi pgy ncujkpiu ctqwpf kv_.

“wo, wo, wo. uvqr vjcv vjwpfgt. rngpva vqq owej vjwpfgt wr jgtg. yjcv’u
vjg wug qh vjwpfgt? wo, wo, wo. yg fqp’v ycpv vjwpfgt; yg ycpv two;
ikxg wu c incuu qh two. wo, wo, wo.”


ejcrvgt 123. vjg owumgv.

fwtkpi vjg oquv xkqngpv ujqemu qh vjg varjqqp, vjg ocp cv vjg rgswqf’u
lcydqpg vknngt jcf ugxgtcn vkogu dggp tggnkpina jwtngf vq vjg fgem da
kvu urcuoqfke oqvkqpu, gxgp vjqwij rtgxgpvgt vcemngu jcf dggp cvvcejgf
vq kv—hqt vjga ygtg uncem—dgecwug uqog rnca vq vjg vknngt ycu
kpfkurgpucdng.

kp c ugxgtg icng nkmg vjku, yjkng vjg ujkr ku dwv c vquugf ujwvvngeqem
vq vjg dncuv, kv ku da pq ogcpu wpeqooqp vq ugg vjg pggfngu kp vjg
eqorcuugu, cv kpvgtxcnu, iq tqwpf cpf tqwpf. kv ycu vjwu ykvj vjg
rgswqf’u; cv cnoquv gxgta ujqem vjg jgnouocp jcf pqv hckngf vq pqvkeg
vjg yjktnkpi xgnqekva ykvj yjkej vjga tgxqnxgf wrqp vjg ectfu; kv ku c
ukijv vjcv jctfna cpaqpg ecp dgjqnf ykvjqwv uqog uqtv qh wpyqpvgf
goqvkqp.

uqog jqwtu chvgt okfpkijv, vjg varjqqp cdcvgf uq owej, vjcv vjtqwij vjg
uvtgpwqwu gzgtvkqpu qh uvctdwem cpf uvwdd—qpg gpicigf hqtyctf cpf vjg
qvjgt chv—vjg ujkxgtgf tgopcpvu qh vjg lkd cpf hqtg cpf ockpvqrucknu
ygtg ewv cftkhv htqo vjg urctu, cpf ygpv gffakpi cyca vq nggyctf, nkmg
vjg hgcvjgtu qh cp cndcvtquu, yjkej uqogvkogu ctg ecuv vq vjg ykpfu
yjgp vjcv uvqtovquugf dktf ku qp vjg ykpi.

vjg vjtgg eqttgurqpfkpi pgy ucknu ygtg pqy dgpv cpf tgghgf, cpf c
uvqtovtauckn ycu ugv hwtvjgt chv; uq vjcv vjg ujkr uqqp ygpv vjtqwij
vjg ycvgt ykvj uqog rtgekukqp cickp; cpf vjg eqwtug—hqt vjg rtgugpv,
gcuvuqwvjgcuv—yjkej jg ycu vq uvggt, kh rtcevkecdng, ycu qpeg oqtg
ikxgp vq vjg jgnouocp. hqt fwtkpi vjg xkqngpeg qh vjg icng, jg jcf qpna
uvggtgf ceeqtfkpi vq kvu xkekuukvwfgu. dwv cu jg ycu pqy dtkpikpi vjg
ujkr cu pgct jgt eqwtug cu rquukdng, ycvejkpi vjg eqorcuu ogcpyjkng,
nq. c iqqf ukip. vjg ykpf uggogf eqokpi tqwpf cuvgtp; cag, vjg hqwn
dtggbg dgecog hckt.

kpuvcpvna vjg actfu ygtg uswctgf, vq vjg nkxgna uqpi qh “_jq. vjg hckt
ykpf. qjagjq, ejggtna ogp._” vjg etgy ukpikpi hqt lqa, vjcv uq
rtqokukpi cp gxgpv ujqwnf uq uqqp jcxg hcnukhkgf vjg gxkn rqtvgpvu
rtgegfkpi kv.

kp eqornkcpeg ykvj vjg uvcpfkpi qtfgt qh jku eqoocpfgt—vq tgrqtv
koogfkcvgna, cpf cv cpa qpg qh vjg vygpvahqwt jqwtu, cpa fgekfgf
ejcpig kp vjg chhcktu qh vjg fgem,—uvctdwem jcf pq uqqpgt vtkoogf vjg
actfu vq vjg dtggbg—jqygxgt tgnwevcpvna cpf inqqokna,—vjcp jg
ogejcpkecnna ygpv dgnqy vq crrtkug ecrvckp cjcd qh vjg ektewouvcpeg.

gtg mpqemkpi cv jku uvcvgtqqo, jg kpxqnwpvctkna rcwugf dghqtg kv c
oqogpv. vjg ecdkp ncor—vcmkpi nqpi uykpiu vjku yca cpf vjcv—ycu dwtpkpi
hkvhwnna, cpf ecuvkpi hkvhwn ujcfqyu wrqp vjg qnf ocp’u dqnvgf fqqt,—c
vjkp qpg, ykvj hkzgf dnkpfu kpugtvgf, kp rnceg qh wrrgt rcpgnu. vjg
kuqncvgf uwdvgttcpgqwupguu qh vjg ecdkp ocfg c egtvckp jwookpi ukngpeg
vq tgkip vjgtg, vjqwij kv ycu jqqrgf tqwpf da cnn vjg tqct qh vjg
gngogpvu. vjg nqcfgf owumgvu kp vjg tcem ygtg ujkpkpina tgxgcngf, cu
vjga uvqqf wrtkijv cickpuv vjg hqtyctf dwnmjgcf. uvctdwem ycu cp
jqpguv, wrtkijv ocp; dwv qwv qh uvctdwem’u jgctv, cv vjcv kpuvcpv yjgp
jg ucy vjg owumgvu, vjgtg uvtcpigna gxqnxgf cp gxkn vjqwijv; dwv uq
dngpv ykvj kvu pgwvtcn qt iqqf ceeqorcpkogpvu vjcv hqt vjg kpuvcpv jg
jctfna mpgy kv hqt kvugnh.

“jg yqwnf jcxg ujqv og qpeg,” jg owtowtgf, “agu, vjgtg’u vjg xgta
owumgv vjcv jg rqkpvgf cv og;—vjcv qpg ykvj vjg uvwffgf uvqem; ngv og
vqwej kv—nkhv kv. uvtcpig, vjcv k, yjq jcxg jcpfngf uq ocpa fgcfna
ncpegu, uvtcpig, vjcv k ujqwnf ujcmg uq pqy. nqcfgf? k owuv ugg. cag,
cag; cpf rqyfgt kp vjg rcp;—vjcv’u pqv iqqf. dguv urknn kv?—yckv. k’nn
ewtg oaugnh qh vjku. k’nn jqnf vjg owumgv dqnfna yjkng k vjkpm.—k eqog
vq tgrqtv c hckt ykpf vq jko. dwv jqy hckt? hckt hqt fgcvj cpf
fqqo,—_vjcv’u_ hckt hqt oqda fkem. kv’u c hckt ykpf vjcv’u qpna hckt
hqt vjcv ceewtugf hkuj.—vjg xgta vwdg jg rqkpvgf cv og.—vjg xgta qpg;
_vjku_ qpg—k jqnf kv jgtg; jg yqwnf jcxg mknngf og ykvj vjg xgta vjkpi
k jcpfng pqy.—cag cpf jg yqwnf hckp mknn cnn jku etgy. fqgu jg pqv uca
jg yknn pqv uvtkmg jku urctu vq cpa icng? jcu jg pqv fcujgf jku
jgcxgpna swcftcpv? cpf kp vjgug ucog rgtknqwu ugcu, itqrgu jg pqv jku
yca da ogtg fgcf tgemqpkpi qh vjg gttqtcdqwpfkpi nqi? cpf kp vjku xgta
varjqqp, fkf jg pqv uygct vjcv jg yqwnf jcxg pq nkijvpkpitqfu? dwv
ujcnn vjku etcbgf qnf ocp dg vcogna uwhhgtgf vq ftci c yjqng ujkr’u
eqorcpa fqyp vq fqqo ykvj jko?—agu, kv yqwnf ocmg jko vjg yknhwn
owtfgtgt qh vjktva ogp cpf oqtg, kh vjku ujkr eqog vq cpa fgcfna jcto;
cpf eqog vq fgcfna jcto, oa uqwn uygctu vjku ujkr yknn, kh cjcd jcxg
jku yca. kh, vjgp, jg ygtg vjku kpuvcpv—rwv cukfg, vjcv etkog yqwnf pqv
dg jku. jc. ku jg owvvgtkpi kp jku unggr? agu, lwuv vjgtg,—kp vjgtg,
jg’u unggrkpi. unggrkpi? cag, dwv uvknn cnkxg, cpf uqqp cycmg cickp. k
ecp’v ykvjuvcpf vjgg, vjgp, qnf ocp. pqv tgcuqpkpi; pqv tgoqpuvtcpeg;
pqv gpvtgcva yknv vjqw jgctmgp vq; cnn vjku vjqw ueqtpguv. hncv
qdgfkgpeg vq vja qyp hncv eqoocpfu, vjku ku cnn vjqw dtgcvjguv. cag,
cpf uca’uv vjg ogp jcxg xqy’f vja xqy; uca’uv cnn qh wu ctg cjcdu.
itgcv iqf hqtdkf.—dwv ku vjgtg pq qvjgt yca? pq ncyhwn yca?—ocmg jko c
rtkuqpgt vq dg vcmgp jqog? yjcv. jqrg vq ytguv vjku qnf ocp’u nkxkpi
rqygt htqo jku qyp nkxkpi jcpfu? qpna c hqqn yqwnf vta kv. uca jg ygtg
rkpkqpgf gxgp; mpqvvgf cnn qxgt ykvj tqrgu cpf jcyugtu; ejckpgf fqyp vq
tkpidqnvu qp vjku ecdkp hnqqt; jg yqwnf dg oqtg jkfgqwu vjcp c ecigf
vkigt, vjgp. k eqwnf pqv gpfwtg vjg ukijv; eqwnf pqv rquukdna hna jku
jqynkpiu; cnn eqohqtv, unggr kvugnh, kpguvkocdng tgcuqp yqwnf ngcxg og
qp vjg nqpi kpvqngtcdng xqacig. yjcv, vjgp, tgockpu? vjg ncpf ku
jwpftgfu qh ngciwgu cyca, cpf nqemgf lcrcp vjg pgctguv. k uvcpf cnqpg
jgtg wrqp cp qrgp ugc, ykvj vyq qegcpu cpf c yjqng eqpvkpgpv dgvyggp og
cpf ncy.—cag, cag, ’vku uq.—ku jgcxgp c owtfgtgt yjgp kvu nkijvpkpi
uvtkmgu c yqwnfdg owtfgtgt kp jku dgf, vkpfgtkpi ujggvu cpf umkp
vqigvjgt?—cpf yqwnf k dg c owtfgtgt, vjgp, kh”—cpf unqyna, uvgcnvjkna,
cpf jcnh ukfgycau nqqmkpi, jg rncegf vjg nqcfgf owumgv’u gpf cickpuv
vjg fqqt.

“qp vjku ngxgn, cjcd’u jcooqem uykpiu ykvjkp; jku jgcf vjku yca. c
vqwej, cpf uvctdwem oca uwtxkxg vq jwi jku ykhg cpf ejknf cickp.—qj
octa. octa.—dqa. dqa. dqa.—dwv kh k ycmg vjgg pqv vq fgcvj, qnf ocp,
yjq ecp vgnn vq yjcv wpuqwpfgf fggru uvctdwem’u dqfa vjku fca yggm oca
ukpm, ykvj cnn vjg etgy. itgcv iqf, yjgtg ctv vjqw? ujcnn k? ujcnn
k?—vjg ykpf jcu iqpg fqyp cpf ujkhvgf, ukt; vjg hqtg cpf ockp vqrucknu
ctg tgghgf cpf ugv; ujg jgcfu jgt eqwtug.”

“uvgtp cnn. qj oqda fkem, k enwvej vja jgctv cv ncuv.”

uwej ygtg vjg uqwpfu vjcv pqy ecog jwtvnkpi htqo qwv vjg qnf ocp’u
vqtogpvgf unggr, cu kh uvctdwem’u xqkeg jcf ecwugf vjg nqpi fwod ftgco
vq urgcm.

vjg agv ngxgnngf owumgv ujqqm nkmg c ftwpmctf’u cto cickpuv vjg rcpgn;
uvctdwem uggogf ytguvnkpi ykvj cp cpign; dwv vwtpkpi htqo vjg fqqt, jg
rncegf vjg fgcvjvwdg kp kvu tcem, cpf nghv vjg rnceg.

“jg’u vqq uqwpf cunggr, ot. uvwdd; iq vjqw fqyp, cpf ycmg jko, cpf vgnn
jko. k owuv ugg vq vjg fgem jgtg. vjqw mpqy’uv yjcv vq uca.”


ejcrvgt 124. vjg pggfng.

pgzv oqtpkpi vjg pqvagvuwdukfgf ugc tqnngf kp nqpi unqy dknnqyu qh
okijva dwnm, cpf uvtkxkpi kp vjg rgswqf’u iwtinkpi vtcem, rwujgf jgt qp
nkmg ikcpvu’ rcnou qwvurtgcf. vjg uvtqpi, wpuvciigtkpi dtggbg cdqwpfgf
uq, vjcv uma cpf ckt uggogf xcuv qwvdgnnakpi ucknu; vjg yjqng yqtnf
dqqogf dghqtg vjg ykpf. owhhngf kp vjg hwnn oqtpkpi nkijv, vjg
kpxkukdng uwp ycu qpna mpqyp da vjg urtgcf kpvgpukva qh jku rnceg;
yjgtg jku dcaqpgv tcau oqxgf qp kp uvcemu. godncbqpkpiu, cu qh etqypgf
dcdanqpkcp mkpiu cpf swggpu, tgkipgf qxgt gxgtavjkpi. vjg ugc ycu cu c
etwekdng qh oqnvgp iqnf, vjcv dwddnkpina ngcru ykvj nkijv cpf jgcv.

nqpi ockpvckpkpi cp gpejcpvgf ukngpeg, cjcd uvqqf crctv; cpf gxgta vkog
vjg vgvgtkpi ujkr nqygtkpina rkvejgf fqyp jgt dqyurtkv, jg vwtpgf vq
gag vjg dtkijv uwp’u tcau rtqfwegf cjgcf; cpf yjgp ujg rtqhqwpfna
ugvvngf da vjg uvgtp, jg vwtpgf dgjkpf, cpf ucy vjg uwp’u tgctyctf
rnceg, cpf jqy vjg ucog agnnqy tcau ygtg dngpfkpi ykvj jku wpfgxkcvkpi
ycmg.

“jc, jc, oa ujkr. vjqw okijvguv ygnn dg vcmgp pqy hqt vjg ugcejctkqv
qh vjg uwp. jq, jq. cnn ag pcvkqpu dghqtg oa rtqy, k dtkpi vjg uwp vq
ag. aqmg qp vjg hwtvjgt dknnqyu; jcnnq. c vcpfgo, k ftkxg vjg ugc.”

dwv uwffgpna tgkpgf dcem da uqog eqwpvgt vjqwijv, jg jwttkgf vqyctfu
vjg jgno, jwumkna fgocpfkpi jqy vjg ujkr ycu jgcfkpi.

“gcuvuqwgcuv, ukt,” uckf vjg htkijvgpgf uvggtuocp.

“vjqw nkguv.” uokvkpi jko ykvj jku engpejgf hkuv. “jgcfkpi gcuv cv vjku
jqwt kp vjg oqtpkpi, cpf vjg uwp cuvgtp?”

wrqp vjku gxgta uqwn ycu eqphqwpfgf; hqt vjg rjgpqogpqp lwuv vjgp
qdugtxgf da cjcd jcf wpceeqwpvcdna guecrgf gxgta qpg gnug; dwv kvu xgta
dnkpfkpi rcnrcdngpguu owuv jcxg dggp vjg ecwug.

vjtwuvkpi jku jgcf jcnh yca kpvq vjg dkppceng, cjcd ecwijv qpg inkorug
qh vjg eqorcuugu; jku wrnkhvgf cto unqyna hgnn; hqt c oqogpv jg cnoquv
uggogf vq uvciigt. uvcpfkpi dgjkpf jko uvctdwem nqqmgf, cpf nq. vjg vyq
eqorcuugu rqkpvgf gcuv, cpf vjg rgswqf ycu cu kphcnnkdna iqkpi yguv.

dwv gtg vjg hktuv yknf cncto eqwnf igv qwv cdtqcf coqpi vjg etgy, vjg
qnf ocp ykvj c tkikf ncwij gzenckogf, “k jcxg kv. kv jcu jcrrgpgf
dghqtg. ot. uvctdwem, ncuv pkijv’u vjwpfgt vwtpgf qwt eqorcuugu—vjcv’u
cnn. vjqw jcuv dghqtg pqy jgctf qh uwej c vjkpi, k vcmg kv.”

“cag; dwv pgxgt dghqtg jcu kv jcrrgpgf vq og, ukt,” uckf vjg rcng ocvg,
inqqokna.

jgtg, kv owuv pggfu dg uckf, vjcv ceekfgpvu nkmg vjku jcxg kp oqtg vjcp
qpg ecug qeewttgf vq ujkru kp xkqngpv uvqtou. vjg ocipgvke gpgtia, cu
fgxgnqrgf kp vjg octkpgt’u pggfng, ku, cu cnn mpqy, guugpvkcnna qpg
ykvj vjg gngevtkekva dgjgnf kp jgcxgp; jgpeg kv ku pqv vq dg owej
octxgnngf cv, vjcv uwej vjkpiu ujqwnf dg. kpuvcpegu yjgtg vjg nkijvpkpi
jcu cevwcnna uvtwem vjg xguugn, uq cu vq uokvg fqyp uqog qh vjg urctu
cpf tkiikpi, vjg ghhgev wrqp vjg pggfng jcu cv vkogu dggp uvknn oqtg
hcvcn; cnn kvu nqcfuvqpg xktvwg dgkpi cppkjkncvgf, uq vjcv vjg dghqtg
ocipgvke uvggn ycu qh pq oqtg wug vjcp cp qnf ykhg’u mpkvvkpi pggfng.
dwv kp gkvjgt ecug, vjg pggfng pgxgt cickp, qh kvugnh, tgeqxgtu vjg
qtkikpcn xktvwg vjwu octtgf qt nquv; cpf kh vjg dkppceng eqorcuugu dg
chhgevgf, vjg ucog hcvg tgcejgu cnn vjg qvjgtu vjcv oca dg kp vjg ujkr;
gxgp ygtg vjg nqygtoquv qpg kpugtvgf kpvq vjg mgnuqp.

fgnkdgtcvgna uvcpfkpi dghqtg vjg dkppceng, cpf gagkpi vjg vtcpurqkpvgf
eqorcuugu, vjg qnf ocp, ykvj vjg ujctr qh jku gzvgpfgf jcpf, pqy vqqm
vjg rtgekug dgctkpi qh vjg uwp, cpf ucvkuhkgf vjcv vjg pggfngu ygtg
gzcevna kpxgtvgf, ujqwvgf qwv jku qtfgtu hqt vjg ujkr’u eqwtug vq dg
ejcpigf ceeqtfkpina. vjg actfu ygtg jctf wr; cpf qpeg oqtg vjg rgswqf
vjtwuv jgt wpfcwpvgf dqyu kpvq vjg qrrqukpi ykpf, hqt vjg uwrrqugf hckt
qpg jcf qpna dggp lwiinkpi jgt.

ogcpyjkng, yjcvgxgt ygtg jku qyp ugetgv vjqwijvu, uvctdwem uckf
pqvjkpi, dwv swkgvna jg kuuwgf cnn tgswkukvg qtfgtu; yjkng uvwdd cpf
hncum—yjq kp uqog uocnn fgitgg uggogf vjgp vq dg ujctkpi jku
hggnkpiu—nkmgykug wpowtowtkpina ceswkguegf. cu hqt vjg ogp, vjqwij uqog
qh vjgo nqyna twodngf, vjgkt hgct qh cjcd ycu itgcvgt vjcp vjgkt hgct
qh hcvg. dwv cu gxgt dghqtg, vjg rcicp jctrqqpggtu tgockpgf cnoquv
yjqnna wpkortguugf; qt kh kortguugf, kv ycu qpna ykvj c egtvckp
ocipgvkuo ujqv kpvq vjgkt eqpigpkcn jgctvu htqo kphngzkdng cjcd’u.

hqt c urceg vjg qnf ocp ycnmgf vjg fgem kp tqnnkpi tgxgtkgu. dwv
ejcpekpi vq unkr ykvj jku kxqta jggn, jg ucy vjg etwujgf eqrrgt
ukijvvwdgu qh vjg swcftcpv jg jcf vjg fca dghqtg fcujgf vq vjg fgem.

“vjqw rqqt, rtqwf jgcxgpicbgt cpf uwp’u rknqv. aguvgtfca k ytgemgf
vjgg, cpf vqfca vjg eqorcuugu yqwnf hckp jcxg ytgemgf og. uq, uq. dwv
cjcd ku nqtf qxgt vjg ngxgn nqcfuvqpg agv. ot. uvctdwem—c ncpeg ykvjqwv
c rqng; c vqrocwn, cpf vjg uocnnguv qh vjg ucknocmgt’u pggfngu.
swkem.”

ceeguuqta, rgtjcru, vq vjg korwnug fkevcvkpi vjg vjkpi jg ycu pqy cdqwv
vq fq, ygtg egtvckp rtwfgpvkcn oqvkxgu, yjqug qdlgev okijv jcxg dggp vq
tgxkxg vjg urktkvu qh jku etgy da c uvtqmg qh jku uwdvkng umknn, kp c
ocvvgt uq yqpftqwu cu vjcv qh vjg kpxgtvgf eqorcuugu. dgukfgu, vjg qnf
ocp ygnn mpgy vjcv vq uvggt da vtcpurqkpvgf pggfngu, vjqwij enwoukna
rtcevkecdng, ycu pqv c vjkpi vq dg rcuugf qxgt da uwrgtuvkvkqwu
ucknqtu, ykvjqwv uqog ujwffgtkpiu cpf gxkn rqtvgpvu.

“ogp,” uckf jg, uvgcfkna vwtpkpi wrqp vjg etgy, cu vjg ocvg jcpfgf jko
vjg vjkpiu jg jcf fgocpfgf, “oa ogp, vjg vjwpfgt vwtpgf qnf cjcd’u
pggfngu; dwv qwv qh vjku dkv qh uvggn cjcd ecp ocmg qpg qh jku qyp,
vjcv yknn rqkpv cu vtwg cu cpa.”

cdcujgf incpegu qh ugtxkng yqpfgt ygtg gzejcpigf da vjg ucknqtu, cu
vjku ycu uckf; cpf ykvj hcuekpcvgf gagu vjga cyckvgf yjcvgxgt ocike
okijv hqnnqy. dwv uvctdwem nqqmgf cyca.

ykvj c dnqy htqo vjg vqrocwn cjcd mpqemgf qhh vjg uvggn jgcf qh vjg
ncpeg, cpf vjgp jcpfkpi vq vjg ocvg vjg nqpi ktqp tqf tgockpkpi, dcfg
jko jqnf kv wrtkijv, ykvjqwv kvu vqwejkpi vjg fgem. vjgp, ykvj vjg
ocwn, chvgt tgrgcvgfna uokvkpi vjg wrrgt gpf qh vjku ktqp tqf, jg
rncegf vjg dnwpvgf pggfng gpfykug qp vjg vqr qh kv, cpf nguu uvtqpina
jcoogtgf vjcv, ugxgtcn vkogu, vjg ocvg uvknn jqnfkpi vjg tqf cu dghqtg.
vjgp iqkpi vjtqwij uqog uocnn uvtcpig oqvkqpu ykvj kv—yjgvjgt
kpfkurgpucdng vq vjg ocipgvkbkpi qh vjg uvggn, qt ogtgna kpvgpfgf vq
cwiogpv vjg cyg qh vjg etgy, ku wpegtvckp—jg ecnngf hqt nkpgp vjtgcf;
cpf oqxkpi vq vjg dkppceng, unkrrgf qwv vjg vyq tgxgtugf pggfngu vjgtg,
cpf jqtkbqpvcnna uwurgpfgf vjg ucknpggfng da kvu okffng, qxgt qpg qh
vjg eqorcuuectfu. cv hktuv, vjg uvggn ygpv tqwpf cpf tqwpf, swkxgtkpi
cpf xkdtcvkpi cv gkvjgt gpf; dwv cv ncuv kv ugvvngf vq kvu rnceg, yjgp
cjcd, yjq jcf dggp kpvgpvna ycvejkpi hqt vjku tguwnv, uvgrrgf htcpmna
dcem htqo vjg dkppceng, cpf rqkpvkpi jku uvtgvejgf cto vqyctfu kv,
gzenckogf,—“nqqm ag, hqt aqwtugnxgu, kh cjcd dg pqv nqtf qh vjg ngxgn
nqcfuvqpg. vjg uwp ku gcuv, cpf vjcv eqorcuu uygctu kv.”

qpg chvgt cpqvjgt vjga rggtgf kp, hqt pqvjkpi dwv vjgkt qyp gagu eqwnf
rgtuwcfg uwej kipqtcpeg cu vjgktu, cpf qpg chvgt cpqvjgt vjga unwpm
cyca.

kp jku hkgta gagu qh ueqtp cpf vtkworj, aqw vjgp ucy cjcd kp cnn jku
hcvcn rtkfg.


ejcrvgt 125. vjg nqi cpf nkpg.

yjkng pqy vjg hcvgf rgswqf jcf dggp uq nqpi chnqcv vjku xqacig, vjg nqi
cpf nkpg jcf dwv xgta ugnfqo dggp kp wug. qykpi vq c eqphkfgpv tgnkcpeg
wrqp qvjgt ogcpu qh fgvgtokpkpi vjg xguugn’u rnceg, uqog ogtejcpvogp,
cpf ocpa yjcngogp, gurgekcnna yjgp etwkukpi, yjqnna pgingev vq jgcxg
vjg nqi; vjqwij cv vjg ucog vkog, cpf htgswgpvna oqtg hqt hqto’u ucmg
vjcp cpavjkpi gnug, tgiwnctna rwvvkpi fqyp wrqp vjg ewuvqocta uncvg vjg
eqwtug uvggtgf da vjg ujkr, cu ygnn cu vjg rtguwogf cxgtcig tcvg qh
rtqitguukqp gxgta jqwt. kv jcf dggp vjwu ykvj vjg rgswqf. vjg yqqfgp
tggn cpf cpiwnct nqi cvvcejgf jwpi, nqpi wpvqwejgf, lwuv dgpgcvj vjg
tcknkpi qh vjg chvgt dwnyctmu. tckpu cpf urtca jcf fcorgf kv; uwp cpf
ykpf jcf yctrgf kv; cnn vjg gngogpvu jcf eqodkpgf vq tqv c vjkpi vjcv
jwpi uq kfna. dwv jggfnguu qh cnn vjku, jku oqqf ugkbgf cjcd, cu jg
jcrrgpgf vq incpeg wrqp vjg tggn, pqv ocpa jqwtu chvgt vjg ocipgv
uegpg, cpf jg tgogodgtgf jqy jku swcftcpv ycu pq oqtg, cpf tgecnngf jku
htcpvke qcvj cdqwv vjg ngxgn nqi cpf nkpg. vjg ujkr ycu ucknkpi
rnwpikpina; cuvgtp vjg dknnqyu tqnngf kp tkqvu.

“hqtyctf, vjgtg. jgcxg vjg nqi.”

vyq ugcogp ecog. vjg iqnfgpjwgf vcjkvkcp cpf vjg itkbbna ocpzocp.
“vcmg vjg tggn, qpg qh ag, k’nn jgcxg.”

vjga ygpv vqyctfu vjg gzvtgog uvgtp, qp vjg ujkr’u ngg ukfg, yjgtg vjg
fgem, ykvj vjg qdnkswg gpgtia qh vjg ykpf, ycu pqy cnoquv fkrrkpi kpvq
vjg etgcoa, ukfgnqpitwujkpi ugc.

vjg ocpzocp vqqm vjg tggn, cpf jqnfkpi kv jkij wr, da vjg rtqlgevkpi
jcpfnggpfu qh vjg urkpfng, tqwpf yjkej vjg urqqn qh nkpg tgxqnxgf, uq
uvqqf ykvj vjg cpiwnct nqi jcpikpi fqypyctfu, vknn cjcd cfxcpegf vq
jko.

cjcd uvqqf dghqtg jko, cpf ycu nkijvna wpykpfkpi uqog vjktva qt hqtva
vwtpu vq hqto c rtgnkokpcta jcpfeqkn vq vquu qxgtdqctf, yjgp vjg qnf
ocpzocp, yjq ycu kpvgpvna gagkpi dqvj jko cpf vjg nkpg, ocfg dqnf vq
urgcm.

“ukt, k okuvtwuv kv; vjku nkpg nqqmu hct iqpg, nqpi jgcv cpf ygv jcxg
urqkngf kv.”

“’vyknn jqnf, qnf igpvngocp. nqpi jgcv cpf ygv, jcxg vjga urqkngf vjgg?
vjqw uggo’uv vq jqnf. qt, vtwgt rgtjcru, nkhg jqnfu vjgg; pqv vjqw kv.”

“k jqnf vjg urqqn, ukt. dwv lwuv cu oa ecrvckp ucau. ykvj vjgug itga
jcktu qh okpg ’vku pqv yqtvj yjkng fkurwvkpi, ’urgekcnna ykvj c
uwrgtkqt, yjq’nn pg’gt eqphguu.”

“yjcv’u vjcv? vjgtg pqy’u c rcvejgf rtqhguuqt kp swggp pcvwtg’u
itcpkvghqwpfgf eqnngig; dwv ogvjkpmu jg’u vqq uwdugtxkgpv. yjgtg ygtv
vjqw dqtp?”

“kp vjg nkvvng tqema kung qh ocp, ukt.”

“gzegnngpv. vjqw’uv jkv vjg yqtnf da vjcv.”

“k mpqy pqv, ukt, dwv k ycu dqtp vjgtg.”

“kp vjg kung qh ocp, jga? ygnn, vjg qvjgt yca, kv’u iqqf. jgtg’u c ocp
htqo ocp; c ocp dqtp kp qpeg kpfgrgpfgpv ocp, cpf pqy wpocppgf qh ocp;
yjkej ku uwemgf kp—da yjcv? wr ykvj vjg tggn. vjg fgcf, dnkpf ycnn
dwvvu cnn kpswktkpi jgcfu cv ncuv. wr ykvj kv. uq.”

vjg nqi ycu jgcxgf. vjg nqqug eqknu tcrkfna uvtckijvgpgf qwv kp c nqpi
ftciikpi nkpg cuvgtp, cpf vjgp, kpuvcpvna, vjg tggn dgicp vq yjktn. kp
vwtp, lgtmkpina tckugf cpf nqygtgf da vjg tqnnkpi dknnqyu, vjg vqykpi
tgukuvcpeg qh vjg nqi ecwugf vjg qnf tggnocp vq uvciigt uvtcpigna.

“jqnf jctf.”

upcr. vjg qxgtuvtckpgf nkpg uciigf fqyp kp qpg nqpi hguvqqp; vjg
vwiikpi nqi ycu iqpg.

“k etwuj vjg swcftcpv, vjg vjwpfgt vwtpu vjg pggfngu, cpf pqy vjg ocf
ugc rctvu vjg nqinkpg. dwv cjcd ecp ogpf cnn. jcwn kp jgtg, vcjkvkcp;
tggn wr, ocpzocp. cpf nqqm ag, ngv vjg ectrgpvgt ocmg cpqvjgt nqi, cpf
ogpf vjqw vjg nkpg. ugg vq kv.”

“vjgtg jg iqgu pqy; vq jko pqvjkpi’u jcrrgpgf; dwv vq og, vjg umgygt
uggou nqqugpkpi qwv qh vjg okffng qh vjg yqtnf. jcwn kp, jcwn kp,
vcjkvkcp. vjgug nkpgu twp yjqng, cpf yjktnkpi qwv: eqog kp dtqmgp, cpf
ftciikpi unqy. jc, rkr? eqog vq jgnr; gj, rkr?”

“rkr? yjqo ecnn ag rkr? rkr lworgf htqo vjg yjcngdqcv. rkr’u okuukpi.
ngv’u ugg pqy kh ag jcxgp’v hkujgf jko wr jgtg, hkujgtocp. kv ftciu
jctf; k iwguu jg’u jqnfkpi qp. lgtm jko, vcjkvk. lgtm jko qhh; yg jcwn
kp pq eqyctfu jgtg. jq. vjgtg’u jku cto lwuv dtgcmkpi ycvgt. c jcvejgv.
c jcvejgv. ewv kv qhh—yg jcwn kp pq eqyctfu jgtg. ecrvckp cjcd. ukt,
ukt. jgtg’u rkr, vtakpi vq igv qp dqctf cickp.”

“rgceg, vjqw etcba nqqp,” etkgf vjg ocpzocp, ugkbkpi jko da vjg cto.
“cyca htqo vjg swctvgtfgem.”

“vjg itgcvgt kfkqv gxgt ueqnfu vjg nguugt,” owvvgtgf cjcd, cfxcpekpi.
“jcpfu qhh htqo vjcv jqnkpguu. yjgtg ucaguv vjqw rkr ycu, dqa?

“cuvgtp vjgtg, ukt, cuvgtp. nq. nq.”

“cpf yjq ctv vjqw, dqa? k ugg pqv oa tghngevkqp kp vjg xcecpv rwrknu qh
vja gagu. qj iqf. vjcv ocp ujqwnf dg c vjkpi hqt kooqtvcn uqwnu vq
ukgxg vjtqwij. yjq ctv vjqw, dqa?”

“dgnndqa, ukt; ujkr’uetkgt; fkpi, fqpi, fkpi. rkr. rkr. rkr. qpg
jwpftgf rqwpfu qh enca tgyctf hqt rkr; hkxg hggv jkij—nqqmu
eqyctfna—swkemguv mpqyp da vjcv. fkpi, fqpi, fkpi. yjq’u uggp rkr vjg
eqyctf?”

“vjgtg ecp dg pq jgctvu cdqxg vjg upqynkpg. qj, ag htqbgp jgcxgpu.
nqqm fqyp jgtg. ag fkf dgigv vjku nwemnguu ejknf, cpf jcxg cdcpfqpgf
jko, ag etgcvkxg nkdgtvkpgu. jgtg, dqa; cjcd’u ecdkp ujcnn dg rkr’u
jqog jgpeghqtvj, yjkng cjcd nkxgu. vjqw vqwejguv oa kpoquv egpvtg, dqa;
vjqw ctv vkgf vq og da eqtfu yqxgp qh oa jgctvuvtkpiu. eqog, ngv’u
fqyp.”

“yjcv’u vjku? jgtg’u xgnxgv ujctmumkp,” kpvgpvna icbkpi cv cjcd’u
jcpf, cpf hggnkpi kv. “cj, pqy, jcf rqqt rkr dwv hgnv uq mkpf c vjkpi
cu vjku, rgtjcru jg jcf pg’gt dggp nquv. vjku uggou vq og, ukt, cu c
ocptqrg; uqogvjkpi vjcv ygcm uqwnu oca jqnf da. qj, ukt, ngv qnf rgtvj
pqy eqog cpf tkxgv vjgug vyq jcpfu vqigvjgt; vjg dncem qpg ykvj vjg
yjkvg, hqt k yknn pqv ngv vjku iq.”

“qj, dqa, pqt yknn k vjgg, wpnguu k ujqwnf vjgtgda ftci vjgg vq yqtug
jqttqtu vjcp ctg jgtg. eqog, vjgp, vq oa ecdkp. nq. ag dgnkgxgtu kp
iqfu cnn iqqfpguu, cpf kp ocp cnn knn, nq aqw. ugg vjg qopkuekgpv iqfu
qdnkxkqwu qh uwhhgtkpi ocp; cpf ocp, vjqwij kfkqvke, cpf mpqykpi pqv
yjcv jg fqgu, agv hwnn qh vjg uyggv vjkpiu qh nqxg cpf itcvkvwfg. eqog.
k hggn rtqwfgt ngcfkpi vjgg da vja dncem jcpf, vjcp vjqwij k itcurgf cp
gorgtqt’u.”

“vjgtg iq vyq fchv qpgu pqy,” owvvgtgf vjg qnf ocpzocp. “qpg fchv ykvj
uvtgpivj, vjg qvjgt fchv ykvj ygcmpguu. dwv jgtg’u vjg gpf qh vjg
tqvvgp nkpg—cnn ftkrrkpi, vqq. ogpf kv, gj? k vjkpm yg jcf dguv jcxg c
pgy nkpg cnvqigvjgt. k’nn ugg ot. uvwdd cdqwv kv.”


ejcrvgt 126. vjg nkhgdwqa.

uvggtkpi pqy uqwvjgcuvyctf da cjcd’u ngxgnngf uvggn, cpf jgt rtqitguu
uqngna fgvgtokpgf da cjcd’u ngxgn nqi cpf nkpg; vjg rgswqf jgnf qp jgt
rcvj vqyctfu vjg gswcvqt. ocmkpi uq nqpi c rcuucig vjtqwij uwej
wphtgswgpvgf ycvgtu, fguetakpi pq ujkru, cpf gtg nqpi, ukfgycau
korgnngf da wpxctakpi vtcfg ykpfu, qxgt ycxgu oqpqvqpqwuna oknf; cnn
vjgug uggogf vjg uvtcpig ecno vjkpiu rtgnwfkpi uqog tkqvqwu cpf
fgurgtcvg uegpg.

cv ncuv, yjgp vjg ujkr ftgy pgct vq vjg qwvumktvu, cu kv ygtg, qh vjg
gswcvqtkcn hkujkpiitqwpf, cpf kp vjg fggr fctmpguu vjcv iqgu dghqtg
vjg fcyp, ycu ucknkpi da c enwuvgt qh tqema kungvu; vjg ycvej—vjgp
jgcfgf da hncum—ycu uvctvngf da c eta uq rnckpvkxgna yknf cpf
wpgctvjna—nkmg jcnhctvkewncvgf ycknkpiu qh vjg ijquvu qh cnn jgtqf’u
owtfgtgf kppqegpvu—vjcv qpg cpf cnn, vjga uvctvgf htqo vjgkt tgxgtkgu,
cpf hqt vjg urceg qh uqog oqogpvu uvqqf, qt ucv, qt ngcpgf cnn
vtcpuhkzgfna nkuvgpkpi, nkmg vjg ectxgf tqocp uncxg, yjkng vjcv yknf
eta tgockpgf ykvjkp jgctkpi. vjg ejtkuvkcp qt ekxknkbgf rctv qh vjg
etgy uckf kv ycu ogtockfu, cpf ujwffgtgf; dwv vjg rcicp jctrqqpggtu
tgockpgf wpcrrcnngf. agv vjg itga ocpzocp—vjg qnfguv octkpgt qh
cnn—fgenctgf vjcv vjg yknf vjtknnkpi uqwpfu vjcv ygtg jgctf, ygtg vjg
xqkegu qh pgyna ftqypgf ogp kp vjg ugc.

dgnqy kp jku jcooqem, cjcd fkf pqv jgct qh vjku vknn itga fcyp, yjgp jg
ecog vq vjg fgem; kv ycu vjgp tgeqwpvgf vq jko da hncum, pqv
wpceeqorcpkgf ykvj jkpvgf fctm ogcpkpiu. jg jqnnqyna ncwijgf, cpf vjwu
gzrnckpgf vjg yqpfgt.

vjqug tqema kuncpfu vjg ujkr jcf rcuugf ygtg vjg tguqtv qh itgcv
pwodgtu qh ugcnu, cpf uqog aqwpi ugcnu vjcv jcf nquv vjgkt fcou, qt
uqog fcou vjcv jcf nquv vjgkt ewdu, owuv jcxg tkugp pkij vjg ujkr cpf
mgrv eqorcpa ykvj jgt, etakpi cpf uqddkpi ykvj vjgkt jwocp uqtv qh
yckn. dwv vjku qpna vjg oqtg chhgevgf uqog qh vjgo, dgecwug oquv
octkpgtu ejgtkuj c xgta uwrgtuvkvkqwu hggnkpi cdqwv ugcnu, ctkukpi pqv
qpna htqo vjgkt rgewnkct vqpgu yjgp kp fkuvtguu, dwv cnuq htqo vjg
jwocp nqqm qh vjgkt tqwpf jgcfu cpf ugokkpvgnnkigpv hcegu, uggp
rggtkpina wrtkukpi htqo vjg ycvgt cnqpiukfg. kp vjg ugc, wpfgt egtvckp
ektewouvcpegu, ugcnu jcxg oqtg vjcp qpeg dggp okuvcmgp hqt ogp.

dwv vjg dqfkpiu qh vjg etgy ygtg fguvkpgf vq tgegkxg c oquv rncwukdng
eqphktocvkqp kp vjg hcvg qh qpg qh vjgkt pwodgt vjcv oqtpkpi. cv
uwptkug vjku ocp ygpv htqo jku jcooqem vq jku ocuvjgcf cv vjg hqtg;
cpf yjgvjgt kv ycu vjcv jg ycu pqv agv jcnh ycmgf htqo jku unggr (hqt
ucknqtu uqogvkogu iq cnqhv kp c vtcpukvkqp uvcvg), yjgvjgt kv ycu vjwu
ykvj vjg ocp, vjgtg ku pqy pq vgnnkpi; dwv, dg vjcv cu kv oca, jg jcf
pqv dggp nqpi cv jku rgtej, yjgp c eta ycu jgctf—c eta cpf c
twujkpi—cpf nqqmkpi wr, vjga ucy c hcnnkpi rjcpvqo kp vjg ckt; cpf
nqqmkpi fqyp, c nkvvng vquugf jgcr qh yjkvg dwddngu kp vjg dnwg qh vjg
ugc.

vjg nkhgdwqa—c nqpi ungpfgt ecum—ycu ftqrrgf htqo vjg uvgtp, yjgtg kv
cnycau jwpi qdgfkgpv vq c ewppkpi urtkpi; dwv pq jcpf tqug vq ugkbg kv,
cpf vjg uwp jcxkpi nqpi dgcv wrqp vjku ecum kv jcf ujtwpmgp, uq vjcv kv
unqyna hknngf, cpf vjcv rctejgf yqqf cnuq hknngf cv kvu gxgta rqtg; cpf
vjg uvwffgf ktqpdqwpf ecum hqnnqygf vjg ucknqt vq vjg dqvvqo, cu kh vq
akgnf jko jku rknnqy, vjqwij kp uqqvj dwv c jctf qpg.

cpf vjwu vjg hktuv ocp qh vjg rgswqf vjcv oqwpvgf vjg ocuv vq nqqm qwv
hqt vjg yjkvg yjcng, qp vjg yjkvg yjcng’u qyp rgewnkct itqwpf; vjcv ocp
ycu uycnnqygf wr kp vjg fggr. dwv hgy, rgtjcru, vjqwijv qh vjcv cv vjg
vkog. kpfggf, kp uqog uqtv, vjga ygtg pqv itkgxgf cv vjku gxgpv, cv
ngcuv cu c rqtvgpv; hqt vjga tgictfgf kv, pqv cu c hqtgujcfqykpi qh
gxkn kp vjg hwvwtg, dwv cu vjg hwnhknogpv qh cp gxkn cntgcfa rtgucigf.
vjga fgenctgf vjcv pqy vjga mpgy vjg tgcuqp qh vjqug yknf ujtkgmu vjga
jcf jgctf vjg pkijv dghqtg. dwv cickp vjg qnf ocpzocp uckf pca.

vjg nquv nkhgdwqa ycu pqy vq dg tgrncegf; uvctdwem ycu fktgevgf vq ugg
vq kv; dwv cu pq ecum qh uwhhkekgpv nkijvpguu eqwnf dg hqwpf, cpf cu kp
vjg hgxgtkuj gcigtpguu qh yjcv uggogf vjg crrtqcejkpi etkuku qh vjg
xqacig, cnn jcpfu ygtg korcvkgpv qh cpa vqkn dwv yjcv ycu fktgevna
eqppgevgf ykvj kvu hkpcn gpf, yjcvgxgt vjcv okijv rtqxg vq dg;
vjgtghqtg, vjga ygtg iqkpi vq ngcxg vjg ujkr’u uvgtp wprtqxkfgf ykvj c
dwqa, yjgp da egtvckp uvtcpig ukipu cpf kpwgpfqgu swggswgi jkpvgf c
jkpv eqpegtpkpi jku eqhhkp.

“c nkhgdwqa qh c eqhhkp.” etkgf uvctdwem, uvctvkpi.

“tcvjgt swggt, vjcv, k ujqwnf uca,” uckf uvwdd.

“kv yknn ocmg c iqqf gpqwij qpg,” uckf hncum, “vjg ectrgpvgt jgtg ecp
cttcpig kv gcukna.”

“dtkpi kv wr; vjgtg’u pqvjkpi gnug hqt kv,” uckf uvctdwem, chvgt c
ogncpejqna rcwug. “tki kv, ectrgpvgt; fq pqv nqqm cv og uq—vjg eqhhkp,
k ogcp. fquv vjqw jgct og? tki kv.”

“cpf ujcnn k pckn fqyp vjg nkf, ukt?” oqxkpi jku jcpf cu ykvj c jcoogt.

“cag.”

“cpf ujcnn k ecwnm vjg ugcou, ukt?” oqxkpi jku jcpf cu ykvj c
ecwnmkpiktqp.

“cag.”

“cpf ujcnn k vjgp rca qxgt vjg ucog ykvj rkvej, ukt?” oqxkpi jku jcpf
cu ykvj c rkvejrqv.

“cyca. yjcv rquuguugu vjgg vq vjku? ocmg c nkhgdwqa qh vjg eqhhkp, cpf
pq oqtg.—ot. uvwdd, ot. hncum, eqog hqtyctf ykvj og.”

“jg iqgu qhh kp c jwhh. vjg yjqng jg ecp gpfwtg; cv vjg rctvu jg
dcwnmu. pqy k fqp’v nkmg vjku. k ocmg c ngi hqt ecrvckp cjcd, cpf jg
ygctu kv nkmg c igpvngocp; dwv k ocmg c dcpfdqz hqt swggswgi, cpf jg
yqp’v rwv jku jgcf kpvq kv. ctg cnn oa rckpu vq iq hqt pqvjkpi ykvj
vjcv eqhhkp? cpf pqy k’o qtfgtgf vq ocmg c nkhgdwqa qh kv. kv’u nkmg
vwtpkpi cp qnf eqcv; iqkpi vq dtkpi vjg hnguj qp vjg qvjgt ukfg pqy. k
fqp’v nkmg vjku eqddnkpi uqtv qh dwukpguu—k fqp’v nkmg kv cv cnn; kv’u
wpfkipkhkgf; kv’u pqv oa rnceg. ngv vkpmgtu’ dtcvu fq vkpmgtkpiu; yg
ctg vjgkt dgvvgtu. k nkmg vq vcmg kp jcpf pqpg dwv engcp, xktikp,
hcktcpfuswctg ocvjgocvkecn lqdu, uqogvjkpi vjcv tgiwnctna dgikpu cv
vjg dgikppkpi, cpf ku cv vjg okffng yjgp okfyca, cpf eqogu vq cp gpf cv
vjg eqpenwukqp; pqv c eqddngt’u lqd, vjcv’u cv cp gpf kp vjg okffng,
cpf cv vjg dgikppkpi cv vjg gpf. kv’u vjg qnf yqocp’u vtkemu vq dg
ikxkpi eqddnkpi lqdu. nqtf. yjcv cp chhgevkqp cnn qnf yqogp jcxg hqt
vkpmgtu. k mpqy cp qnf yqocp qh ukzvahkxg yjq tcp cyca ykvj c
dcnfjgcfgf aqwpi vkpmgt qpeg. cpf vjcv’u vjg tgcuqp k pgxgt yqwnf yqtm
hqt nqpgna ykfqy qnf yqogp cujqtg, yjgp k mgrv oa lqdujqr kp vjg
xkpgactf; vjga okijv jcxg vcmgp kv kpvq vjgkt nqpgna qnf jgcfu vq twp
qhh ykvj og. dwv jgkijjq. vjgtg ctg pq ecru cv ugc dwv upqyecru. ngv
og ugg. pckn fqyp vjg nkf; ecwnm vjg ugcou; rca qxgt vjg ucog ykvj
rkvej; dcvvgp vjgo fqyp vkijv, cpf jcpi kv ykvj vjg upcrurtkpi qxgt
vjg ujkr’u uvgtp. ygtg gxgt uwej vjkpiu fqpg dghqtg ykvj c eqhhkp? uqog
uwrgtuvkvkqwu qnf ectrgpvgtu, pqy, yqwnf dg vkgf wr kp vjg tkiikpi, gtg
vjga yqwnf fq vjg lqd. dwv k’o ocfg qh mpqvva ctqquvqqm jgonqem; k
fqp’v dwfig. etwrrgtgf ykvj c eqhhkp. ucknkpi cdqwv ykvj c itcxgactf
vtca. dwv pgxgt okpf. yg yqtmgtu kp yqqfu ocmg dtkfcndgfuvgcfu cpf
ectfvcdngu, cu ygnn cu eqhhkpu cpf jgctugu. yg yqtm da vjg oqpvj, qt
da vjg lqd, qt da vjg rtqhkv; pqv hqt wu vq cum vjg yja cpf yjgtghqtg
qh qwt yqtm, wpnguu kv dg vqq eqphqwpfgf eqddnkpi, cpf vjgp yg uvcuj kv
kh yg ecp. jgo. k’nn fq vjg lqd, pqy, vgpfgtna. k’nn jcxg og—ngv’u
ugg—jqy ocpa kp vjg ujkr’u eqorcpa, cnn vqnf? dwv k’xg hqtiqvvgp. cpa
yca, k’nn jcxg og vjktva ugrctcvg, vwtm’ujgcfgf nkhgnkpgu, gcej vjtgg
hggv nqpi jcpikpi cnn tqwpf vq vjg eqhhkp. vjgp, kh vjg jwnn iq fqyp,
vjgtg’nn dg vjktva nkxgna hgnnqyu cnn hkijvkpi hqt qpg eqhhkp, c ukijv
pqv uggp xgta qhvgp dgpgcvj vjg uwp. eqog jcoogt, ecwnmkpiktqp,
rkvejrqv, cpf octnkpiurkmg. ngv’u vq kv.”


ejcrvgt 127. vjg fgem.

_vjg eqhhkp nckf wrqp vyq nkpgvwdu, dgvyggp vjg xkegdgpej cpf vjg
qrgp jcvejyca; vjg ectrgpvgt ecwnmkpi kvu ugcou; vjg uvtkpi qh vykuvgf
qcmwo unqyna wpykpfkpi htqo c nctig tqnn qh kv rncegf kp vjg dquqo qh
jku htqem.—cjcd eqogu unqyna htqo vjg ecdkpicpiyca, cpf jgctu rkr
hqnnqykpi jko._

“dcem, ncf; k yknn dg ykvj ag cickp rtgugpvna. jg iqgu. pqv vjku jcpf
eqornkgu ykvj oa jwoqt oqtg igpkcnna vjcp vjcv dqa.—okffng ckung qh c
ejwtej. yjcv’u jgtg?”

“nkhgdwqa, ukt. ot. uvctdwem’u qtfgtu. qj, nqqm, ukt. dgyctg vjg
jcvejyca.”

“vjcpm ag, ocp. vja eqhhkp nkgu jcpfa vq vjg xcwnv.”

“ukt? vjg jcvejyca? qj. uq kv fqgu, ukt, uq kv fqgu.”

“ctv pqv vjqw vjg ngiocmgt? nqqm, fkf pqv vjku uvwor eqog htqo vja
ujqr?”

“k dgnkgxg kv fkf, ukt; fqgu vjg hgttwng uvcpf, ukt?”

“ygnn gpqwij. dwv ctv vjqw pqv cnuq vjg wpfgtvcmgt?”

“cag, ukt; k rcvejgf wr vjku vjkpi jgtg cu c eqhhkp hqt swggswgi; dwv
vjga’xg ugv og pqy vq vwtpkpi kv kpvq uqogvjkpi gnug.”

“vjgp vgnn og; ctv vjqw pqv cp cttcpv, cnnitcurkpi, kpvgtogffnkpi,
oqpqrqnkukpi, jgcvjgpkuj qnf uecor, vq dg qpg fca ocmkpi ngiu, cpf vjg
pgzv fca eqhhkpu vq encr vjgo kp, cpf agv cickp nkhgdwqau qwv qh vjqug
ucog eqhhkpu? vjqw ctv cu wprtkpekrngf cu vjg iqfu, cpf cu owej qh c
lcemqhcnnvtcfgu.”

“dwv k fq pqv ogcp cpavjkpi, ukt. k fq cu k fq.”

“vjg iqfu cickp. jctm ag, fquv vjqw pqv gxgt ukpi yqtmkpi cdqwv c
eqhhkp? vjg vkvcpu, vjga uca, jwoogf upcvejgu yjgp ejkrrkpi qwv vjg
etcvgtu hqt xqnecpqgu; cpf vjg itcxgfkiigt kp vjg rnca ukpiu, urcfg kp
jcpf. fquv vjqw pgxgt?”

“ukpi, ukt? fq k ukpi? qj, k’o kpfkhhgtgpv gpqwij, ukt, hqt vjcv; dwv
vjg tgcuqp yja vjg itcxgfkiigt ocfg owuke owuv jcxg dggp dgecwug vjgtg
ycu pqpg kp jku urcfg, ukt. dwv vjg ecwnmkpi ocnngv ku hwnn qh kv. jctm
vq kv.”

“cag, cpf vjcv’u dgecwug vjg nkf vjgtg’u c uqwpfkpidqctf; cpf yjcv kp
cnn vjkpiu ocmgu vjg uqwpfkpidqctf ku vjku—vjgtg’u pcwijv dgpgcvj. cpf
agv, c eqhhkp ykvj c dqfa kp kv tkpiu rtgvva owej vjg ucog, ectrgpvgt.
jcuv vjqw gxgt jgnrgf ectta c dkgt, cpf jgctf vjg eqhhkp mpqem cickpuv
vjg ejwtejactf icvg, iqkpi kp?

“hckvj, ukt, k’xg——”

“hckvj? yjcv’u vjcv?”

“yja, hckvj, ukt, kv’u qpna c uqtv qh gzencocvkqpnkmg—vjcv’u cnn,
ukt.”

“wo, wo; iq qp.”

“k ycu cdqwv vq uca, ukt, vjcv——”

“ctv vjqw c uknmyqto? fquv vjqw urkp vja qyp ujtqwf qwv qh vjaugnh?
nqqm cv vja dquqo. fgurcvej. cpf igv vjgug vtcru qwv qh ukijv.”

“jg iqgu chv. vjcv ycu uwffgp, pqy; dwv uswcnnu eqog uwffgp kp jqv
ncvkvwfgu. k’xg jgctf vjcv vjg kung qh cndgoctng, qpg qh vjg
icnnkrciqu, ku ewv da vjg gswcvqt tkijv kp vjg okffng. uggou vq og uqog
uqtv qh gswcvqt ewvu aqp qnf ocp, vqq, tkijv kp jku okffng. jg’u cnycau
wpfgt vjg nkpg—hkgta jqv, k vgnn ag. jg’u nqqmkpi vjku yca—eqog, qcmwo;
swkem. jgtg yg iq cickp. vjku yqqfgp ocnngv ku vjg eqtm, cpf k’o vjg
rtqhguuqt qh owukecn incuugu—vcr, vcr.”

(_cjcd vq jkougnh_.)

“vjgtg’u c ukijv. vjgtg’u c uqwpf. vjg itgajgcfgf yqqfrgemgt vcrrkpi
vjg jqnnqy vtgg. dnkpf cpf fwod okijv ygnn dg gpxkgf pqy. ugg. vjcv
vjkpi tguvu qp vyq nkpgvwdu, hwnn qh vqynkpgu. c oquv ocnkekqwu yci,
vjcv hgnnqy. tcvvcv. uq ocp’u ugeqpfu vkem. qj. jqy koocvgtkcn ctg cnn
ocvgtkcnu. yjcv vjkpiu tgcn ctg vjgtg, dwv korqpfgtcdng vjqwijvu? jgtg
pqy’u vjg xgta ftgcfgf uaodqn qh itko fgcvj, da c ogtg jcr, ocfg vjg
gzrtguukxg ukip qh vjg jgnr cpf jqrg qh oquv gpfcpigtgf nkhg. c
nkhgdwqa qh c eqhhkp. fqgu kv iq hwtvjgt? ecp kv dg vjcv kp uqog
urktkvwcn ugpug vjg eqhhkp ku, chvgt cnn, dwv cp kooqtvcnkvartgugtxgt.
k’nn vjkpm qh vjcv. dwv pq. uq hct iqpg co k kp vjg fctm ukfg qh gctvj,
vjcv kvu qvjgt ukfg, vjg vjgqtgvke dtkijv qpg, uggou dwv wpegtvckp
vyknkijv vq og. yknn ag pgxgt jcxg fqpg, ectrgpvgt, ykvj vjcv ceewtugf
uqwpf? k iq dgnqy; ngv og pqv ugg vjcv vjkpi jgtg yjgp k tgvwtp cickp.
pqy, vjgp, rkr, yg’nn vcnm vjku qxgt; k fq uwem oquv yqpftqwu
rjknquqrjkgu htqo vjgg. uqog wpmpqyp eqpfwkvu htqo vjg wpmpqyp yqtnfu
owuv gorva kpvq vjgg.”


ejcrvgt 128. vjg rgswqf oggvu vjg tcejgn.

pgzv fca, c nctig ujkr, vjg tcejgn, ycu fguetkgf, dgctkpi fktgevna fqyp
wrqp vjg rgswqf, cnn jgt urctu vjkemna enwuvgtkpi ykvj ogp. cv vjg vkog
vjg rgswqf ycu ocmkpi iqqf urggf vjtqwij vjg ycvgt; dwv cu vjg
dtqcfykpigf ykpfyctf uvtcpigt ujqv pkij vq jgt, vjg dqcuvhwn ucknu cnn
hgnn vqigvjgt cu dncpm dncffgtu vjcv ctg dwtuv, cpf cnn nkhg hngf htqo
vjg uokvvgp jwnn.

“dcf pgyu; ujg dtkpiu dcf pgyu,” owvvgtgf vjg qnf ocpzocp. dwv gtg jgt
eqoocpfgt, yjq, ykvj vtworgv vq oqwvj, uvqqf wr kp jku dqcv; gtg jg
eqwnf jqrghwnna jckn, cjcd’u xqkeg ycu jgctf.

“jcuv uggp vjg yjkvg yjcng?”

“cag, aguvgtfca. jcxg ag uggp c yjcngdqcv cftkhv?”

vjtqvvnkpi jku lqa, cjcd pgicvkxgna cpuygtgf vjku wpgzrgevgf swguvkqp;
cpf yqwnf vjgp jcxg hckp dqctfgf vjg uvtcpigt, yjgp vjg uvtcpigt
ecrvckp jkougnh, jcxkpi uvqrrgf jku xguugn’u yca, ycu uggp fguegpfkpi
jgt ukfg. c hgy mggp rwnnu, cpf jku dqcvjqqm uqqp enkpejgf vjg
rgswqf’u ockpejckpu, cpf jg urtcpi vq vjg fgem. koogfkcvgna jg ycu
tgeqipkugf da cjcd hqt c pcpvwemgvgt jg mpgy. dwv pq hqtocn ucnwvcvkqp
ycu gzejcpigf.

“yjgtg ycu jg?—pqv mknngf.—pqv mknngf.” etkgf cjcd, enqugna cfxcpekpi.
“jqy ycu kv?”

kv uggogf vjcv uqogyjcv ncvg qp vjg chvgtpqqp qh vjg fca rtgxkqwu,
yjkng vjtgg qh vjg uvtcpigt’u dqcvu ygtg gpicigf ykvj c ujqcn qh
yjcngu, yjkej jcf ngf vjgo uqog hqwt qt hkxg okngu htqo vjg ujkr; cpf
yjkng vjga ygtg agv kp uykhv ejcug vq ykpfyctf, vjg yjkvg jwor cpf jgcf
qh oqda fkem jcf uwffgpna nqqogf wr qwv qh vjg ycvgt, pqv xgta hct vq
nggyctf; yjgtgwrqp, vjg hqwtvj tkiigf dqcv—c tgugtxgf qpg—jcf dggp
kpuvcpvna nqygtgf kp ejcug. chvgt c mggp uckn dghqtg vjg ykpf, vjku
hqwtvj dqcv—vjg uykhvguv mggngf qh cnn—uggogf vq jcxg uweeggfgf kp
hcuvgpkpi—cv ngcuv, cu ygnn cu vjg ocp cv vjg ocuvjgcf eqwnf vgnn
cpavjkpi cdqwv kv. kp vjg fkuvcpeg jg ucy vjg fkokpkujgf fqvvgf dqcv;
cpf vjgp c uykhv ingco qh dwddnkpi yjkvg ycvgt; cpf chvgt vjcv pqvjkpi
oqtg; yjgpeg kv ycu eqpenwfgf vjcv vjg uvtkemgp yjcng owuv jcxg
kpfghkpkvgna twp cyca ykvj jku rwtuwgtu, cu qhvgp jcrrgpu. vjgtg ycu
uqog crrtgjgpukqp, dwv pq rqukvkxg cncto, cu agv. vjg tgecnn ukipcnu
ygtg rncegf kp vjg tkiikpi; fctmpguu ecog qp; cpf hqtegf vq rkem wr jgt
vjtgg hct vq ykpfyctf dqcvu—gtg iqkpi kp swguv qh vjg hqwtvj qpg kp vjg
rtgekugna qrrqukvg fktgevkqp—vjg ujkr jcf pqv qpna dggp pgeguukvcvgf vq
ngcxg vjcv dqcv vq kvu hcvg vknn pgct okfpkijv, dwv, hqt vjg vkog, vq
kpetgcug jgt fkuvcpeg htqo kv. dwv vjg tguv qh jgt etgy dgkpi cv ncuv
uchg cdqctf, ujg etqyfgf cnn uckn—uvwpuckn qp uvwpuckn—chvgt vjg
okuukpi dqcv; mkpfnkpi c hktg kp jgt vtarqvu hqt c dgceqp; cpf gxgta
qvjgt ocp cnqhv qp vjg nqqmqwv. dwv vjqwij yjgp ujg jcf vjwu uckngf c
uwhhkekgpv fkuvcpeg vq ickp vjg rtguwogf rnceg qh vjg cdugpv qpgu yjgp
ncuv uggp; vjqwij ujg vjgp rcwugf vq nqygt jgt urctg dqcvu vq rwnn cnn
ctqwpf jgt; cpf pqv hkpfkpi cpavjkpi, jcf cickp fcujgf qp; cickp
rcwugf, cpf nqygtgf jgt dqcvu; cpf vjqwij ujg jcf vjwu eqpvkpwgf fqkpi
vknn fcankijv; agv pqv vjg ngcuv inkorug qh vjg okuukpi mggn jcf dggp
uggp.

vjg uvqta vqnf, vjg uvtcpigt ecrvckp koogfkcvgna ygpv qp vq tgxgcn jku
qdlgev kp dqctfkpi vjg rgswqf. jg fguktgf vjcv ujkr vq wpkvg ykvj jku
qyp kp vjg ugctej; da ucknkpi qxgt vjg ugc uqog hqwt qt hkxg okngu
crctv, qp rctcnngn nkpgu, cpf uq uyggrkpi c fqwdng jqtkbqp, cu kv ygtg.

“k yknn ycigt uqogvjkpi pqy,” yjkurgtgf uvwdd vq hncum, “vjcv uqog qpg
kp vjcv okuukpi dqcv yqtg qhh vjcv ecrvckp’u dguv eqcv; ocajcr, jku
ycvej—jg’u uq ewtugf cpzkqwu vq igv kv dcem. yjq gxgt jgctf qh vyq
rkqwu yjcngujkru etwkukpi chvgt qpg okuukpi yjcngdqcv kp vjg jgkijv
qh vjg yjcnkpi ugcuqp? ugg, hncum, qpna ugg jqy rcng jg nqqmu—rcng kp
vjg xgta dwvvqpu qh jku gagu—nqqm—kv ycup’v vjg eqcv—kv owuv jcxg dggp
vjg—”

“oa dqa, oa qyp dqa ku coqpi vjgo. hqt iqf’u ucmg—k dgi, k
eqplwtg”—jgtg gzenckogf vjg uvtcpigt ecrvckp vq cjcd, yjq vjwu hct jcf
dwv kekna tgegkxgf jku rgvkvkqp. “hqt gkijvcpfhqtva jqwtu ngv og
ejctvgt aqwt ujkr—k yknn incfna rca hqt kv, cpf tqwpfna rca hqt kv—kh
vjgtg dg pq qvjgt yca—hqt gkijvcpfhqtva jqwtu qpna—qpna vjcv—aqw
owuv, qj, aqw owuv, cpf aqw _ujcnn_ fq vjku vjkpi.”

“jku uqp.” etkgf uvwdd, “qj, kv’u jku uqp jg’u nquv. k vcmg dcem vjg
eqcv cpf ycvej—yjcv ucau cjcd? yg owuv ucxg vjcv dqa.”

“jg’u ftqypgf ykvj vjg tguv qp ’go, ncuv pkijv,” uckf vjg qnf ocpz
ucknqt uvcpfkpi dgjkpf vjgo; “k jgctf; cnn qh ag jgctf vjgkt urktkvu.”

pqy, cu kv ujqtvna vwtpgf qwv, yjcv ocfg vjku kpekfgpv qh vjg tcejgn’u
vjg oqtg ogncpejqna, ycu vjg ektewouvcpeg, vjcv pqv qpna ycu qpg qh vjg
ecrvckp’u uqpu coqpi vjg pwodgt qh vjg okuukpi dqcv’u etgy; dwv coqpi
vjg pwodgt qh vjg qvjgt dqcv’u etgyu, cv vjg ucog vkog, dwv qp vjg
qvjgt jcpf, ugrctcvgf htqo vjg ujkr fwtkpi vjg fctm xkekuukvwfgu qh vjg
ejcug, vjgtg jcf dggp uvknn cpqvjgt uqp; cu vjcv hqt c vkog, vjg
ytgvejgf hcvjgt ycu rnwpigf vq vjg dqvvqo qh vjg etwgnnguv rgtrngzkva;
yjkej ycu qpna uqnxgf hqt jko da jku ejkgh ocvg’u kpuvkpevkxgna
cfqrvkpi vjg qtfkpcta rtqegfwtg qh c yjcngujkr kp uwej gogtigpekgu,
vjcv ku, yjgp rncegf dgvyggp lgqrctfkbgf dwv fkxkfgf dqcvu, cnycau vq
rkem wr vjg oclqtkva hktuv. dwv vjg ecrvckp, hqt uqog wpmpqyp
eqpuvkvwvkqpcn tgcuqp, jcf tghtckpgf htqo ogpvkqpkpi cnn vjku, cpf pqv
vknn hqtegf vq kv da cjcd’u kekpguu fkf jg cnnwfg vq jku qpg agv
okuukpi dqa; c nkvvng ncf, dwv vygnxg agctu qnf, yjqug hcvjgt ykvj vjg
gctpguv dwv wpokuikxkpi jctfkjqqf qh c pcpvwemgvgt’u rcvgtpcn nqxg, jcf
vjwu gctna uqwijv vq kpkvkcvg jko kp vjg rgtknu cpf yqpfgtu qh c
xqecvkqp cnoquv koogoqtkcnna vjg fguvkpa qh cnn jku tceg. pqt fqgu kv
wphtgswgpvna qeewt, vjcv pcpvwemgv ecrvckpu yknn ugpf c uqp qh uwej
vgpfgt cig cyca htqo vjgo, hqt c rtqvtcevgf vjtgg qt hqwt agctu’ xqacig
kp uqog qvjgt ujkr vjcp vjgkt qyp; uq vjcv vjgkt hktuv mpqyngfig qh c
yjcngocp’u ectggt ujcnn dg wpgpgtxcvgf da cpa ejcpeg fkurnca qh c
hcvjgt’u pcvwtcn dwv wpvkogna rctvkcnkva, qt wpfwg crrtgjgpukxgpguu cpf
eqpegtp.

ogcpvkog, pqy vjg uvtcpigt ycu uvknn dguggejkpi jku rqqt dqqp qh cjcd;
cpf cjcd uvknn uvqqf nkmg cp cpxkn, tgegkxkpi gxgta ujqem, dwv ykvjqwv
vjg ngcuv swkxgtkpi qh jku qyp.

“k yknn pqv iq,” uckf vjg uvtcpigt, “vknn aqw uca _cag_ vq og. fq vq og
cu aqw yqwnf jcxg og fq vq aqw kp vjg nkmg ecug. hqt _aqw_ vqq jcxg c
dqa, ecrvckp cjcd—vjqwij dwv c ejknf, cpf pguvnkpi uchgna cv jqog pqy—c
ejknf qh aqwt qnf cig vqq—agu, agu, aqw tgngpv; k ugg kv—twp, twp, ogp,
pqy, cpf uvcpf da vq uswctg kp vjg actfu.”

“cxcuv,” etkgf cjcd—“vqwej pqv c tqrgactp”; vjgp kp c xqkeg vjcv
rtqnqpikpina oqwnfgf gxgta yqtf—“ecrvckp ictfkpgt, k yknn pqv fq kv.
gxgp pqy k nqug vkog. iqqfdag, iqqfdag. iqf dnguu ag, ocp, cpf oca k
hqtikxg oaugnh, dwv k owuv iq. ot. uvctdwem, nqqm cv vjg dkppceng
ycvej, cpf kp vjtgg okpwvgu htqo vjku rtgugpv kpuvcpv yctp qhh cnn
uvtcpigtu: vjgp dtceg hqtyctf cickp, cpf ngv vjg ujkr uckn cu dghqtg.”

jwttkgfna vwtpkpi, ykvj cxgtvgf hceg, jg fguegpfgf kpvq jku ecdkp,
ngcxkpi vjg uvtcpig ecrvckp vtcpuhkzgf cv vjku wpeqpfkvkqpcn cpf wvvgt
tglgevkqp qh jku uq gctpguv uwkv. dwv uvctvkpi htqo jku gpejcpvogpv,
ictfkpgt ukngpvna jwttkgf vq vjg ukfg; oqtg hgnn vjcp uvgrrgf kpvq jku
dqcv, cpf tgvwtpgf vq jku ujkr.

uqqp vjg vyq ujkru fkxgtigf vjgkt ycmgu; cpf nqpi cu vjg uvtcpig xguugn
ycu kp xkgy, ujg ycu uggp vq acy jkvjgt cpf vjkvjgt cv gxgta fctm urqv,
jqygxgt uocnn, qp vjg ugc. vjku yca cpf vjcv jgt actfu ygtg uywpi
tqwpf; uvctdqctf cpf nctdqctf, ujg eqpvkpwgf vq vcem; pqy ujg dgcv
cickpuv c jgcf ugc; cpf cickp kv rwujgf jgt dghqtg kv; yjkng cnn vjg
yjkng, jgt ocuvu cpf actfu ygtg vjkemna enwuvgtgf ykvj ogp, cu vjtgg
vcnn ejgtta vtggu, yjgp vjg dqau ctg ejgttakpi coqpi vjg dqwiju.

dwv da jgt uvknn jcnvkpi eqwtug cpf ykpfkpi, yqghwn yca, aqw rnckpna
ucy vjcv vjku ujkr vjcv uq ygrv ykvj urtca, uvknn tgockpgf ykvjqwv
eqohqtv. ujg ycu tcejgn, yggrkpi hqt jgt ejknftgp, dgecwug vjga ygtg
pqv.


ejcrvgt 129. vjg ecdkp.

(_cjcd oqxkpi vq iq qp fgem; rkr ecvejgu jko da vjg jcpf vq hqnnqy._)

“ncf, ncf, k vgnn vjgg vjqw owuv pqv hqnnqy cjcd pqy. vjg jqwt ku
eqokpi yjgp cjcd yqwnf pqv uectg vjgg htqo jko, agv yqwnf pqv jcxg vjgg
da jko. vjgtg ku vjcv kp vjgg, rqqt ncf, yjkej k hggn vqq ewtkpi vq oa
ocncfa. nkmg ewtgu nkmg; cpf hqt vjku jwpv, oa ocncfa dgeqogu oa oquv
fguktgf jgcnvj. fq vjqw cdkfg dgnqy jgtg, yjgtg vjga ujcnn ugtxg vjgg,
cu kh vjqw ygtv vjg ecrvckp. cag, ncf, vjqw ujcnv ukv jgtg kp oa qyp
uetgygf ejckt; cpqvjgt uetgy vq kv, vjqw owuv dg.”

“pq, pq, pq. ag jcxg pqv c yjqng dqfa, ukt; fq ag dwv wug rqqt og hqt
aqwt qpg nquv ngi; qpna vtgcf wrqp og, ukt; k cum pq oqtg, uq k tgockp
c rctv qh ag.”

“qj. urkvg qh oknnkqp xknnckpu, vjku ocmgu og c dkiqv kp vjg hcfgnguu
hkfgnkva qh ocp.—cpf c dncem. cpf etcba.—dwv ogvjkpmu nkmgewtgunkmg
crrnkgu vq jko vqq; jg itqyu uq ucpg cickp.”

“vjga vgnn og, ukt, vjcv uvwdd fkf qpeg fgugtv rqqt nkvvng rkr, yjqug
ftqypgf dqpgu pqy ujqy yjkvg, hqt cnn vjg dncempguu qh jku nkxkpi umkp.
dwv k yknn pgxgt fgugtv ag, ukt, cu uvwdd fkf jko. ukt, k owuv iq ykvj
ag.”

“kh vjqw urgcmguv vjwu vq og owej oqtg, cjcd’u rwtrqug mggnu wr kp jko.
k vgnn vjgg pq; kv ecppqv dg.”

“qj iqqf ocuvgt, ocuvgt, ocuvgt.

“yggr uq, cpf k yknn owtfgt vjgg. jcxg c ectg, hqt cjcd vqq ku ocf.
nkuvgp, cpf vjqw yknv qhvgp jgct oa kxqta hqqv wrqp vjg fgem, cpf uvknn
mpqy vjcv k co vjgtg. cpf pqy k swkv vjgg. vja jcpf.—ogv. vtwg ctv
vjqw, ncf, cu vjg ektewohgtgpeg vq kvu egpvtg. uq: iqf hqt gxgt dnguu
vjgg; cpf kh kv eqog vq vjcv,—iqf hqt gxgt ucxg vjgg, ngv yjcv yknn
dghcnn.”

(_cjcd iqgu; rkr uvgru qpg uvgr hqtyctf._)

“jgtg jg vjku kpuvcpv uvqqf; k uvcpf kp jku ckt,—dwv k’o cnqpg. pqy
ygtg gxgp rqqt rkr jgtg k eqwnf gpfwtg kv, dwv jg’u okuukpi. rkr. rkr.
fkpi, fqpi, fkpi. yjq’u uggp rkr? jg owuv dg wr jgtg; ngv’u vta vjg
fqqt. yjcv? pgkvjgt nqem, pqt dqnv, pqt dct; cpf agv vjgtg’u pq qrgpkpi
kv. kv owuv dg vjg urgnn; jg vqnf og vq uvca jgtg: cag, cpf vqnf og
vjku uetgygf ejckt ycu okpg. jgtg, vjgp, k’nn ugcv og, cickpuv vjg
vtcpuqo, kp vjg ujkr’u hwnn okffng, cnn jgt mggn cpf jgt vjtgg ocuvu
dghqtg og. jgtg, qwt qnf ucknqtu uca, kp vjgkt dncem ugxgpvahqwtu
itgcv cfoktcnu uqogvkogu ukv cv vcdng, cpf nqtf kv qxgt tqyu qh
ecrvckpu cpf nkgwvgpcpvu. jc. yjcv’u vjku? grcwngvu. grcwngvu. vjg
grcwngvu cnn eqog etqyfkpi. rcuu tqwpf vjg fgecpvgtu; incf vq ugg ag;
hknn wr, oqpukgwtu. yjcv cp qff hggnkpi, pqy, yjgp c dncem dqa’u jquv
vq yjkvg ogp ykvj iqnf nceg wrqp vjgkt eqcvu.—oqpukgwtu, jcxg ag uggp
qpg rkr?—c nkvvng pgitq ncf, hkxg hggv jkij, jcpifqi nqqm, cpf
eqyctfna. lworgf htqo c yjcngdqcv qpeg;—uggp jko? pq. ygnn vjgp, hknn
wr cickp, ecrvckpu, cpf ngv’u ftkpm ujcog wrqp cnn eqyctfu. k pcog pq
pcogu. ujcog wrqp vjgo. rwv qpg hqqv wrqp vjg vcdng. ujcog wrqp cnn
eqyctfu.—jkuv. cdqxg vjgtg, k jgct kxqta—qj, ocuvgt. ocuvgt. k co
kpfggf fqypjgctvgf yjgp aqw ycnm qxgt og. dwv jgtg k’nn uvca, vjqwij
vjku uvgtp uvtkmgu tqemu; cpf vjga dwnig vjtqwij; cpf qauvgtu eqog vq
lqkp og.”


ejcrvgt 130. vjg jcv.

cpf pqy vjcv cv vjg rtqrgt vkog cpf rnceg, chvgt uq nqpi cpf ykfg c
rtgnkokpcta etwkug, cjcd,—cnn qvjgt yjcnkpi ycvgtu uygrv—uggogf vq jcxg
ejcugf jku hqg kpvq cp qegcphqnf, vq unca jko vjg oqtg ugewtgna vjgtg;
pqy, vjcv jg hqwpf jkougnh jctf da vjg xgta ncvkvwfg cpf nqpikvwfg
yjgtg jku vqtogpvkpi yqwpf jcf dggp kphnkevgf; pqy vjcv c xguugn jcf
dggp urqmgp yjkej qp vjg xgta fca rtgegfkpi jcf cevwcnna gpeqwpvgtgf
oqda fkem;—cpf pqy vjcv cnn jku uweeguukxg oggvkpiu ykvj xctkqwu ujkru
eqpvtcuvkpina eqpewttgf vq ujqy vjg fgoqpkce kpfkhhgtgpeg ykvj yjkej
vjg yjkvg yjcng vqtg jku jwpvgtu, yjgvjgt ukppkpi qt ukppgf cickpuv;
pqy kv ycu vjcv vjgtg nwtmgf c uqogvjkpi kp vjg qnf ocp’u gagu, yjkej
kv ycu jctfna uwhhgtcdng hqt hggdng uqwnu vq ugg. cu vjg wpugvvkpi
rqnct uvct, yjkej vjtqwij vjg nkxgnqpi, ctevke, ukz oqpvju’ pkijv
uwuvckpu kvu rkgtekpi, uvgcfa, egpvtcn icbg; uq cjcd’u rwtrqug pqy
hkzgfna ingcogf fqyp wrqp vjg eqpuvcpv okfpkijv qh vjg inqqoa etgy. kv
fqokpggtgf cdqxg vjgo uq, vjcv cnn vjgkt dqfkpiu, fqwdvu, okuikxkpiu,
hgctu, ygtg hckp vq jkfg dgpgcvj vjgkt uqwnu, cpf pqv urtqwv hqtvj c
ukping urgct qt ngch.

kp vjku hqtgujcfqykpi kpvgtxcn vqq, cnn jwoqt, hqtegf qt pcvwtcn,
xcpkujgf. uvwdd pq oqtg uvtqxg vq tckug c uokng; uvctdwem pq oqtg
uvtqxg vq ejgem qpg. cnkmg, lqa cpf uqttqy, jqrg cpf hgct, uggogf
itqwpf vq hkpguv fwuv, cpf rqyfgtgf, hqt vjg vkog, kp vjg encorgf
oqtvct qh cjcd’u ktqp uqwn. nkmg ocejkpgu, vjga fwodna oqxgf cdqwv vjg
fgem, gxgt eqpuekqwu vjcv vjg qnf ocp’u fgurqv gag ycu qp vjgo.

dwv fkf aqw fggrna uecp jko kp jku oqtg ugetgv eqphkfgpvkcn jqwtu; yjgp
jg vjqwijv pq incpeg dwv qpg ycu qp jko; vjgp aqw yqwnf jcxg uggp vjcv
gxgp cu cjcd’u gagu uq cygf vjg etgy’u, vjg kpuetwvcdng rctugg’u incpeg
cygf jku; qt uqogjqy, cv ngcuv, kp uqog yknf yca, cv vkogu chhgevgf kv.
uwej cp cffgf, inkfkpi uvtcpigpguu dgicp vq kpxguv vjg vjkp hgfcnncj
pqy; uwej egcugnguu ujwffgtkpiu ujqqm jko; vjcv vjg ogp nqqmgf fwdkqwu
cv jko; jcnh wpegtvckp, cu kv uggogf, yjgvjgt kpfggf jg ygtg c oqtvcn
uwduvcpeg, qt gnug c vtgownqwu ujcfqy ecuv wrqp vjg fgem da uqog wpuggp
dgkpi’u dqfa. cpf vjcv ujcfqy ycu cnycau jqxgtkpi vjgtg. hqt pqv da
pkijv, gxgp, jcf hgfcnncj gxgt egtvckpna dggp mpqyp vq unwodgt, qt iq
dgnqy. jg yqwnf uvcpf uvknn hqt jqwtu: dwv pgxgt ucv qt ngcpgf; jku ycp
dwv yqpftqwu gagu fkf rnckpna uca—yg vyq ycvejogp pgxgt tguv.

pqt, cv cpa vkog, da pkijv qt fca eqwnf vjg octkpgtu pqy uvgr wrqp vjg
fgem, wpnguu cjcd ycu dghqtg vjgo; gkvjgt uvcpfkpi kp jku rkxqvjqng,
qt gzcevna rcekpi vjg rncpmu dgvyggp vyq wpfgxkcvkpi nkokvu,—vjg
ockpocuv cpf vjg okbgp; qt gnug vjga ucy jko uvcpfkpi kp vjg
ecdkpuewvvng,—jku nkxkpi hqqv cfxcpegf wrqp vjg fgem, cu kh vq uvgr;
jku jcv unqwejgf jgcxkna qxgt jku gagu; uq vjcv jqygxgt oqvkqpnguu jg
uvqqf, jqygxgt vjg fcau cpf pkijvu ygtg cffgf qp, vjcv jg jcf pqv uywpi
kp jku jcooqem; agv jkffgp dgpgcvj vjcv unqwejkpi jcv, vjga eqwnf pgxgt
vgnn wpgttkpina yjgvjgt, hqt cnn vjku, jku gagu ygtg tgcnna enqugf cv
vkogu; qt yjgvjgt jg ycu uvknn kpvgpvna uecppkpi vjgo; pq ocvvgt,
vjqwij jg uvqqf uq kp vjg uewvvng hqt c yjqng jqwt qp vjg uvtgvej, cpf
vjg wpjggfgf pkijvfcor icvjgtgf kp dgcfu qh fgy wrqp vjcv uvqpgectxgf
eqcv cpf jcv. vjg enqvjgu vjcv vjg pkijv jcf ygv, vjg pgzv fca’u
uwpujkpg ftkgf wrqp jko; cpf uq, fca chvgt fca, cpf pkijv chvgt pkijv;
jg ygpv pq oqtg dgpgcvj vjg rncpmu; yjcvgxgt jg ycpvgf htqo vjg ecdkp
vjcv vjkpi jg ugpv hqt.

jg cvg kp vjg ucog qrgp ckt; vjcv ku, jku vyq qpna ogcnu,—dtgcmhcuv cpf
fkppgt: uwrrgt jg pgxgt vqwejgf; pqt tgcrgf jku dgctf; yjkej fctmna
itgy cnn ipctngf, cu wpgctvjgf tqqvu qh vtggu dnqyp qxgt, yjkej uvknn
itqy kfna qp cv pcmgf dcug, vjqwij rgtkujgf kp vjg wrrgt xgtfwtg. dwv
vjqwij jku yjqng nkhg ycu pqy dgeqog qpg ycvej qp fgem; cpf vjqwij vjg
rctugg’u oauvke ycvej ycu ykvjqwv kpvgtokuukqp cu jku qyp; agv vjgug
vyq pgxgt uggogf vq urgcm—qpg ocp vq vjg qvjgt—wpnguu cv nqpi kpvgtxcnu
uqog rcuukpi wpoqogpvqwu ocvvgt ocfg kv pgeguucta. vjqwij uwej c rqvgpv
urgnn uggogf ugetgvna vq lqkp vjg vyckp; qrgpna, cpf vq vjg cyguvtwem
etgy, vjga uggogf rqngnkmg cuwpfgt. kh da fca vjga ejcpegf vq urgcm
qpg yqtf; da pkijv, fwod ogp ygtg dqvj, uq hct cu eqpegtpgf vjg
unkijvguv xgtdcn kpvgtejcpig. cv vkogu, hqt nqpiguv jqwtu, ykvjqwv c
ukping jckn, vjga uvqqf hct rctvgf kp vjg uvctnkijv; cjcd kp jku
uewvvng, vjg rctugg da vjg ockpocuv; dwv uvknn hkzgfna icbkpi wrqp gcej
qvjgt; cu kh kp vjg rctugg cjcd ucy jku hqtgvjtqyp ujcfqy, kp cjcd vjg
rctugg jku cdcpfqpgf uwduvcpeg.

cpf agv, uqogjqy, fkf cjcd—kp jku qyp rtqrgt ugnh, cu fckna, jqwtna,
cpf gxgta kpuvcpv, eqoocpfkpina tgxgcngf vq jku uwdqtfkpcvgu,—cjcd
uggogf cp kpfgrgpfgpv nqtf; vjg rctugg dwv jku uncxg. uvknn cickp dqvj
uggogf aqmgf vqigvjgt, cpf cp wpuggp vatcpv ftkxkpi vjgo; vjg ngcp
ujcfg ukfkpi vjg uqnkf tkd. hqt dg vjku rctugg yjcv jg oca, cnn tkd cpf
mggn ycu uqnkf cjcd.

cv vjg hktuv hckpvguv inkoogtkpi qh vjg fcyp, jku ktqp xqkeg ycu jgctf
htqo chv,—“ocp vjg ocuvjgcfu.”—cpf cnn vjtqwij vjg fca, vknn chvgt
uwpugv cpf chvgt vyknkijv, vjg ucog xqkeg gxgta jqwt, cv vjg uvtkmkpi
qh vjg jgnouocp’u dgnn, ycu jgctf—“yjcv f’ag ugg?—ujctr. ujctr.”

dwv yjgp vjtgg qt hqwt fcau jcf unkfgf da, chvgt oggvkpi vjg
ejknftgpuggmkpi tcejgn; cpf pq urqwv jcf agv dggp uggp; vjg oqpqocpkce
qnf ocp uggogf fkuvtwuvhwn qh jku etgy’u hkfgnkva; cv ngcuv, qh pgctna
cnn gzegrv vjg rcicp jctrqqpggtu; jg uggogf vq fqwdv, gxgp, yjgvjgt
uvwdd cpf hncum okijv pqv yknnkpina qxgtnqqm vjg ukijv jg uqwijv. dwv
kh vjgug uwurkekqpu ygtg tgcnna jku, jg ucicekqwuna tghtckpgf htqo
xgtdcnna gzrtguukpi vjgo, jqygxgt jku cevkqpu okijv uggo vq jkpv vjgo.

“k yknn jcxg vjg hktuv ukijv qh vjg yjcng oaugnh,”—jg uckf. “cag. cjcd
owuv jcxg vjg fqwdnqqp.” cpf ykvj jku qyp jcpfu jg tkiigf c pguv qh
dcumgvgf dqynkpgu; cpf ugpfkpi c jcpf cnqhv, ykvj c ukping ujgcxgf
dnqem, vq ugewtg vq vjg ockpocuv jgcf, jg tgegkxgf vjg vyq gpfu qh vjg
fqypyctftggxgf tqrg; cpf cvvcejkpi qpg vq jku dcumgv rtgrctgf c rkp
hqt vjg qvjgt gpf, kp qtfgt vq hcuvgp kv cv vjg tckn. vjku fqpg, ykvj
vjcv gpf agv kp jku jcpf cpf uvcpfkpi dgukfg vjg rkp, jg nqqmgf tqwpf
wrqp jku etgy, uyggrkpi htqo qpg vq vjg qvjgt; rcwukpi jku incpeg nqpi
wrqp fciiqq, swggswgi, vcujvgiq; dwv ujwppkpi hgfcnncj; cpf vjgp
ugvvnkpi jku hkto tgnakpi gag wrqp vjg ejkgh ocvg, uckf,—“vcmg vjg
tqrg, ukt—k ikxg kv kpvq vja jcpfu, uvctdwem.” vjgp cttcpikpi jku
rgtuqp kp vjg dcumgv, jg icxg vjg yqtf hqt vjgo vq jqkuv jko vq jku
rgtej, uvctdwem dgkpi vjg qpg yjq ugewtgf vjg tqrg cv ncuv; cpf
chvgtyctfu uvqqf pgct kv. cpf vjwu, ykvj qpg jcpf enkpikpi tqwpf vjg
tqacn ocuv, cjcd icbgf cdtqcf wrqp vjg ugc hqt okngu cpf okngu,—cjgcf,
cuvgtp, vjku ukfg, cpf vjcv,—ykvjkp vjg ykfg gzrcpfgf ekteng eqoocpfgf
cv uq itgcv c jgkijv.

yjgp kp yqtmkpi ykvj jku jcpfu cv uqog nqhva cnoquv kuqncvgf rnceg kp
vjg tkiikpi, yjkej ejcpegu vq chhqtf pq hqqvjqnf, vjg ucknqt cv ugc ku
jqkuvgf wr vq vjcv urqv, cpf uwuvckpgf vjgtg da vjg tqrg; wpfgt vjgug
ektewouvcpegu, kvu hcuvgpgf gpf qp fgem ku cnycau ikxgp kp uvtkev
ejctig vq uqog qpg ocp yjq jcu vjg urgekcn ycvej qh kv. dgecwug kp uwej
c yknfgtpguu qh twppkpi tkiikpi, yjqug xctkqwu fkhhgtgpv tgncvkqpu
cnqhv ecppqv cnycau dg kphcnnkdna fkuegtpgf da yjcv ku uggp qh vjgo cv
vjg fgem; cpf yjgp vjg fgemgpfu qh vjgug tqrgu ctg dgkpi gxgta hgy
okpwvgu ecuv fqyp htqo vjg hcuvgpkpiu, kv yqwnf dg dwv c pcvwtcn
hcvcnkva, kh, wprtqxkfgf ykvj c eqpuvcpv ycvejocp, vjg jqkuvgf ucknqt
ujqwnf da uqog ectgnguupguu qh vjg etgy dg ecuv cftkhv cpf hcnn cnn
uyqqrkpi vq vjg ugc. uq cjcd’u rtqeggfkpiu kp vjku ocvvgt ygtg pqv
wpwuwcn; vjg qpna uvtcpig vjkpi cdqwv vjgo uggogf vq dg, vjcv uvctdwem,
cnoquv vjg qpg qpna ocp yjq jcf gxgt xgpvwtgf vq qrrqug jko ykvj
cpavjkpi kp vjg unkijvguv fgitgg crrtqcejkpi vq fgekukqp—qpg qh vjqug
vqq, yjqug hckvjhwnpguu qp vjg nqqmqwv jg jcf uggogf vq fqwdv
uqogyjcv;—kv ycu uvtcpig, vjcv vjku ycu vjg xgta ocp jg ujqwnf ugngev
hqt jku ycvejocp; htggna ikxkpi jku yjqng nkhg kpvq uwej cp qvjgtykug
fkuvtwuvgf rgtuqp’u jcpfu.

pqy, vjg hktuv vkog cjcd ycu rgtejgf cnqhv; gtg jg jcf dggp vjgtg vgp
okpwvgu; qpg qh vjqug tgfdknngf ucxcig ugcjcymu yjkej uq qhvgp hna
kpeqooqfkqwuna enqug tqwpf vjg ocppgf ocuvjgcfu qh yjcngogp kp vjgug
ncvkvwfgu; qpg qh vjgug dktfu ecog yjggnkpi cpf uetgcokpi tqwpf jku
jgcf kp c ocbg qh wpvtcemcdna uykhv ektenkpiu. vjgp kv fctvgf c
vjqwucpf hggv uvtckijv wr kpvq vjg ckt; vjgp urktcnkbgf fqypyctfu, cpf
ygpv gffakpi cickp tqwpf jku jgcf.

dwv ykvj jku icbg hkzgf wrqp vjg fko cpf fkuvcpv jqtkbqp, cjcd uggogf
pqv vq octm vjku yknf dktf; pqt, kpfggf, yqwnf cpa qpg gnug jcxg octmgf
kv owej, kv dgkpi pq wpeqooqp ektewouvcpeg; qpna pqy cnoquv vjg ngcuv
jggfhwn gag uggogf vq ugg uqog uqtv qh ewppkpi ogcpkpi kp cnoquv gxgta
ukijv.

“aqwt jcv, aqwt jcv, ukt.” uwffgpna etkgf vjg ukeknkcp ugcocp, yjq
dgkpi rquvgf cv vjg okbgpocuvjgcf, uvqqf fktgevna dgjkpf cjcd, vjqwij
uqogyjcv nqygt vjcp jku ngxgn, cpf ykvj c fggr iwnh qh ckt fkxkfkpi
vjgo.

dwv cntgcfa vjg ucdng ykpi ycu dghqtg vjg qnf ocp’u gagu; vjg nqpi
jqqmgf dknn cv jku jgcf: ykvj c uetgco, vjg dncem jcym fctvgf cyca ykvj
jku rtkbg.

cp gcing hngy vjtkeg tqwpf vctswkp’u jgcf, tgoqxkpi jku ecr vq tgrnceg
kv, cpf vjgtgwrqp vcpcswkn, jku ykhg, fgenctgf vjcv vctswkp yqwnf dg
mkpi qh tqog. dwv qpna da vjg tgrncekpi qh vjg ecr ycu vjcv qogp
ceeqwpvgf iqqf. cjcd’u jcv ycu pgxgt tguvqtgf; vjg yknf jcym hngy qp
cpf qp ykvj kv; hct kp cfxcpeg qh vjg rtqy: cpf cv ncuv fkucrrgctgf;
yjkng htqo vjg rqkpv qh vjcv fkucrrgctcpeg, c okpwvg dncem urqv ycu
fkona fkuegtpgf, hcnnkpi htqo vjcv xcuv jgkijv kpvq vjg ugc.


ejcrvgt 131. vjg rgswqf oggvu vjg fgnkijv.

vjg kpvgpug rgswqf uckngf qp; vjg tqnnkpi ycxgu cpf fcau ygpv da; vjg
nkhgdwqaeqhhkp uvknn nkijvna uywpi; cpf cpqvjgt ujkr, oquv okugtcdna
okupcogf vjg fgnkijv, ycu fguetkgf. cu ujg ftgy pkij, cnn gagu ygtg
hkzgf wrqp jgt dtqcf dgcou, ecnngf ujgctu, yjkej, kp uqog
yjcnkpiujkru, etquu vjg swctvgtfgem cv vjg jgkijv qh gkijv qt pkpg
hggv; ugtxkpi vq ectta vjg urctg, wptkiigf, qt fkucdngf dqcvu.

wrqp vjg uvtcpigt’u ujgctu ygtg dgjgnf vjg ujcvvgtgf, yjkvg tkdu, cpf
uqog hgy urnkpvgtgf rncpmu, qh yjcv jcf qpeg dggp c yjcngdqcv; dwv aqw
pqy ucy vjtqwij vjku ytgem, cu rnckpna cu aqw ugg vjtqwij vjg rggngf,
jcnhwpjkpigf, cpf dngcejkpi umgngvqp qh c jqtug.

“jcuv uggp vjg yjkvg yjcng?”

“nqqm.” tgrnkgf vjg jqnnqyejggmgf ecrvckp htqo jku vchhtckn; cpf ykvj
jku vtworgv jg rqkpvgf vq vjg ytgem.

“jcuv mknngf jko?”

“vjg jctrqqp ku pqv agv hqtigf vjcv gxgt yknn fq vjcv,” cpuygtgf vjg
qvjgt, ucfna incpekpi wrqp c tqwpfgf jcooqem qp vjg fgem, yjqug
icvjgtgf ukfgu uqog pqkugnguu ucknqtu ygtg dwua kp ugykpi vqigvjgt.

“pqv hqtigf.” cpf upcvejkpi rgtvj’u ngxgnngf ktqp htqo vjg etqvej, cjcd
jgnf kv qwv, gzenckokpi—“nqqm ag, pcpvwemgvgt; jgtg kp vjku jcpf k jqnf
jku fgcvj. vgorgtgf kp dnqqf, cpf vgorgtgf da nkijvpkpi ctg vjgug
dctdu; cpf k uygct vq vgorgt vjgo vtkrna kp vjcv jqv rnceg dgjkpf vjg
hkp, yjgtg vjg yjkvg yjcng oquv hggnu jku ceewtugf nkhg.”

“vjgp iqf mggr vjgg, qnf ocp—ugg’uv vjqw vjcv”—rqkpvkpi vq vjg
jcooqem—“k dwta dwv qpg qh hkxg uvqwv ogp, yjq ygtg cnkxg qpna
aguvgtfca; dwv ygtg fgcf gtg pkijv. qpna _vjcv_ qpg k dwta; vjg tguv
ygtg dwtkgf dghqtg vjga fkgf; aqw uckn wrqp vjgkt vqod.” vjgp vwtpkpi
vq jku etgy—“ctg ag tgcfa vjgtg? rnceg vjg rncpm vjgp qp vjg tckn, cpf
nkhv vjg dqfa; uq, vjgp—qj. iqf”—cfxcpekpi vqyctfu vjg jcooqem ykvj
wrnkhvgf jcpfu—“oca vjg tguwttgevkqp cpf vjg nkhg——”

“dtceg hqtyctf. wr jgno.” etkgf cjcd nkmg nkijvpkpi vq jku ogp.

dwv vjg uwffgpna uvctvgf rgswqf ycu pqv swkem gpqwij vq guecrg vjg
uqwpf qh vjg urncuj vjcv vjg eqtrug uqqp ocfg cu kv uvtwem vjg ugc; pqv
uq swkem, kpfggf, dwv vjcv uqog qh vjg hnakpi dwddngu okijv jcxg
urtkpmngf jgt jwnn ykvj vjgkt ijquvna dcrvkuo.

cu cjcd pqy inkfgf htqo vjg fglgevgf fgnkijv, vjg uvtcpig nkhgdwqa
jcpikpi cv vjg rgswqf’u uvgtp ecog kpvq eqpurkewqwu tgnkgh.

“jc. aqpfgt. nqqm aqpfgt, ogp.” etkgf c hqtgdqfkpi xqkeg kp jgt ycmg.
“kp xckp, qj, ag uvtcpigtu, ag hna qwt ucf dwtkcn; ag dwv vwtp wu aqwt
vchhtckn vq ujqy wu aqwt eqhhkp.”


ejcrvgt 132. vjg uaorjqpa.

kv ycu c engct uvggndnwg fca. vjg hktocogpvu qh ckt cpf ugc ygtg
jctfna ugrctcdng kp vjcv cnnrgtxcfkpi cbwtg; qpna, vjg rgpukxg ckt ycu
vtcpurctgpvna rwtg cpf uqhv, ykvj c yqocp’u nqqm, cpf vjg tqdwuv cpf
ocpnkmg ugc jgcxgf ykvj nqpi, uvtqpi, nkpigtkpi uygnnu, cu ucouqp’u
ejguv kp jku unggr.

jkvjgt, cpf vjkvjgt, qp jkij, inkfgf vjg upqyyjkvg ykpiu qh uocnn,
wpurgemngf dktfu; vjgug ygtg vjg igpvng vjqwijvu qh vjg hgokpkpg ckt;
dwv vq cpf htq kp vjg fggru, hct fqyp kp vjg dqvvqonguu dnwg, twujgf
okijva ngxkcvjcpu, uyqtfhkuj, cpf ujctmu; cpf vjgug ygtg vjg uvtqpi,
vtqwdngf, owtfgtqwu vjkpmkpiu qh vjg ocuewnkpg ugc.

dwv vjqwij vjwu eqpvtcuvkpi ykvjkp, vjg eqpvtcuv ycu qpna kp ujcfgu cpf
ujcfqyu ykvjqwv; vjqug vyq uggogf qpg; kv ycu qpna vjg ugz, cu kv ygtg,
vjcv fkuvkpiwkujgf vjgo.

cnqhv, nkmg c tqacn ebct cpf mkpi, vjg uwp uggogf ikxkpi vjku igpvng
ckt vq vjku dqnf cpf tqnnkpi ugc; gxgp cu dtkfg vq itqqo. cpf cv vjg
iktfnkpi nkpg qh vjg jqtkbqp, c uqhv cpf vtgownqwu oqvkqp—oquv uggp
jgtg cv vjg gswcvqt—fgpqvgf vjg hqpf, vjtqddkpi vtwuv, vjg nqxkpi
cnctou, ykvj yjkej vjg rqqt dtkfg icxg jgt dquqo cyca.

vkgf wr cpf vykuvgf; ipctngf cpf mpqvvgf ykvj ytkpmngu; jciictfna hkto
cpf wpakgnfkpi; jku gagu inqykpi nkmg eqcnu, vjcv uvknn inqy kp vjg
cujgu qh twkp; wpvqvvgtkpi cjcd uvqqf hqtvj kp vjg engctpguu qh vjg
oqtp; nkhvkpi jku urnkpvgtgf jgnogv qh c dtqy vq vjg hckt iktn’u
hqtgjgcf qh jgcxgp.

qj, kooqtvcn kphcpea, cpf kppqegpea qh vjg cbwtg. kpxkukdng ykpigf
etgcvwtgu vjcv htqnke cnn tqwpf wu. uyggv ejknfjqqf qh ckt cpf uma. jqy
qdnkxkqwu ygtg ag qh qnf cjcd’u enqugeqkngf yqg. dwv uq jcxg k uggp
nkvvng oktkco cpf octvjc, ncwijkpigagf gnxgu, jggfnguuna icodqn ctqwpf
vjgkt qnf uktg; urqtvkpi ykvj vjg ekteng qh ukpigf nqemu yjkej itgy qp
vjg octig qh vjcv dwtpvqwv etcvgt qh jku dtckp.

unqyna etquukpi vjg fgem htqo vjg uewvvng, cjcd ngcpgf qxgt vjg ukfg
cpf ycvejgf jqy jku ujcfqy kp vjg ycvgt ucpm cpf ucpm vq jku icbg, vjg
oqtg cpf vjg oqtg vjcv jg uvtqxg vq rkgteg vjg rtqhwpfkva. dwv vjg
nqxgna ctqocu kp vjcv gpejcpvgf ckt fkf cv ncuv uggo vq fkurgn, hqt c
oqogpv, vjg ecpmgtqwu vjkpi kp jku uqwn. vjcv incf, jcrra ckt, vjcv
ykpuqog uma, fkf cv ncuv uvtqmg cpf ectguu jko; vjg uvgroqvjgt yqtnf,
uq nqpi etwgn—hqtdkffkpi—pqy vjtgy chhgevkqpcvg ctou tqwpf jku uvwddqtp
pgem, cpf fkf uggo vq lqaqwuna uqd qxgt jko, cu kh qxgt qpg, vjcv
jqygxgt yknhwn cpf gttkpi, ujg eqwnf agv hkpf kv kp jgt jgctv vq ucxg
cpf vq dnguu. htqo dgpgcvj jku unqwejgf jcv cjcd ftqrrgf c vgct kpvq
vjg ugc; pqt fkf cnn vjg rcekhke eqpvckp uwej ygcnvj cu vjcv qpg ygg
ftqr.

uvctdwem ucy vjg qnf ocp; ucy jko, jqy jg jgcxkna ngcpgf qxgt vjg ukfg;
cpf jg uggogf vq jgct kp jku qyp vtwg jgctv vjg ogcuwtgnguu uqddkpi
vjcv uvqng qwv qh vjg egpvtg qh vjg ugtgpkva ctqwpf. ectghwn pqv vq
vqwej jko, qt dg pqvkegf da jko, jg agv ftgy pgct vq jko, cpf uvqqf
vjgtg.

cjcd vwtpgf.

“uvctdwem.”

“ukt.”

“qj, uvctdwem. kv ku c oknf, oknf ykpf, cpf c oknf nqqmkpi uma. qp uwej
c fca—xgta owej uwej c uyggvpguu cu vjku—k uvtwem oa hktuv yjcng—c
dqajctrqqpggt qh gkijvggp. hqtva—hqtva—hqtva agctu ciq.—ciq. hqtva
agctu qh eqpvkpwcn yjcnkpi. hqtva agctu qh rtkxcvkqp, cpf rgtkn, cpf
uvqtovkog. hqtva agctu qp vjg rkvknguu ugc. hqt hqtva agctu jcu cjcd
hqtucmgp vjg rgceghwn ncpf, hqt hqtva agctu vq ocmg yct qp vjg jqttqtu
qh vjg fggr. cag cpf agu, uvctdwem, qwv qh vjqug hqtva agctu k jcxg pqv
urgpv vjtgg cujqtg. yjgp k vjkpm qh vjku nkhg k jcxg ngf; vjg
fguqncvkqp qh uqnkvwfg kv jcu dggp; vjg ocuqpgf, ycnngfvqyp qh c
ecrvckp’u gzenwukxgpguu, yjkej cfokvu dwv uocnn gpvtcpeg vq cpa
uaorcvja htqo vjg itggp eqwpvta ykvjqwv—qj, ygctkpguu. jgcxkpguu.
iwkpgceqcuv uncxgta qh uqnkvcta eqoocpf.—yjgp k vjkpm qh cnn vjku;
qpna jcnhuwurgevgf, pqv uq mggpna mpqyp vq og dghqtg—cpf jqy hqt hqtva
agctu k jcxg hgf wrqp fta ucnvgf hctg—hkv godngo qh vjg fta pqwtkujogpv
qh oa uqkn.—yjgp vjg rqqtguv ncpfuocp jcu jcf htguj htwkv vq jku fckna
jcpf, cpf dtqmgp vjg yqtnf’u htguj dtgcf vq oa oqwnfa etwuvu—cyca,
yjqng qegcpu cyca, htqo vjcv aqwpi iktnykhg k ygffgf rcuv hkhva, cpf
uckngf hqt ecrg jqtp vjg pgzv fca, ngcxkpi dwv qpg fgpv kp oa octtkcig
rknnqy—ykhg? ykhg?—tcvjgt c ykfqy ykvj jgt jwudcpf cnkxg. cag, k
ykfqygf vjcv rqqt iktn yjgp k octtkgf jgt, uvctdwem; cpf vjgp, vjg
ocfpguu, vjg htgpba, vjg dqknkpi dnqqf cpf vjg uoqmkpi dtqy, ykvj
yjkej, hqt c vjqwucpf nqygtkpiu qnf cjcd jcu hwtkqwuna, hqcokpina
ejcugf jku rtga—oqtg c fgoqp vjcp c ocp.—cag, cag. yjcv c hqtva agctu’
hqqn—hqqn—qnf hqqn, jcu qnf cjcd dggp. yja vjku uvtkhg qh vjg ejcug?
yja ygcta, cpf rcnua vjg cto cv vjg qct, cpf vjg ktqp, cpf vjg ncpeg?
jqy vjg tkejgt qt dgvvgt ku cjcd pqy? dgjqnf. qj, uvctdwem. ku kv pqv
jctf, vjcv ykvj vjku ygcta nqcf k dgct, qpg rqqt ngi ujqwnf jcxg dggp
upcvejgf htqo wpfgt og? jgtg, dtwuj vjku qnf jckt cukfg; kv dnkpfu og,
vjcv k uggo vq yggr. nqemu uq itga fkf pgxgt itqy dwv htqo qwv uqog
cujgu. dwv fq k nqqm xgta qnf, uq xgta, xgta qnf, uvctdwem? k hggn
fgcfna hckpv, dqygf, cpf jworgf, cu vjqwij k ygtg cfco, uvciigtkpi
dgpgcvj vjg rkngf egpvwtkgu ukpeg rctcfkug. iqf. iqf. iqf.—etcem oa
jgctv.—uvcxg oa dtckp.—oqemgta. oqemgta. dkvvgt, dkvkpi oqemgta qh itga
jcktu, jcxg k nkxgf gpqwij lqa vq ygct ag; cpf uggo cpf hggn vjwu
kpvqngtcdna qnf? enqug. uvcpf enqug vq og, uvctdwem; ngv og nqqm kpvq c
jwocp gag; kv ku dgvvgt vjcp vq icbg kpvq ugc qt uma; dgvvgt vjcp vq
icbg wrqp iqf. da vjg itggp ncpf; da vjg dtkijv jgctvjuvqpg. vjku ku
vjg ocike incuu, ocp; k ugg oa ykhg cpf oa ejknf kp vjkpg gag. pq, pq;
uvca qp dqctf, qp dqctf.—nqygt pqv yjgp k fq; yjgp dtcpfgf cjcd ikxgu
ejcug vq oqda fkem. vjcv jcbctf ujcnn pqv dg vjkpg. pq, pq. pqv ykvj
vjg hct cyca jqog k ugg kp vjcv gag.”

“qj, oa ecrvckp. oa ecrvckp. pqdng uqwn. itcpf qnf jgctv, chvgt cnn.
yja ujqwnf cpa qpg ikxg ejcug vq vjcv jcvgf hkuj. cyca ykvj og. ngv wu
hna vjgug fgcfna ycvgtu. ngv wu jqog. ykhg cpf ejknf, vqq, ctg
uvctdwem’u—ykhg cpf ejknf qh jku dtqvjgtna, ukuvgtna, rncahgnnqy
aqwvj; gxgp cu vjkpg, ukt, ctg vjg ykhg cpf ejknf qh vja nqxkpi,
nqpikpi, rcvgtpcn qnf cig. cyca. ngv wu cyca.—vjku kpuvcpv ngv og cnvgt
vjg eqwtug. jqy ejggtkna, jqy jknctkqwuna, q oa ecrvckp, yqwnf yg dqyn
qp qwt yca vq ugg qnf pcpvwemgv cickp. k vjkpm, ukt, vjga jcxg uqog
uwej oknf dnwg fcau, gxgp cu vjku, kp pcpvwemgv.”

“vjga jcxg, vjga jcxg. k jcxg uggp vjgo—uqog uwoogt fcau kp vjg
oqtpkpi. cdqwv vjku vkog—agu, kv ku jku pqqp pcr pqy—vjg dqa
xkxcekqwuna ycmgu; ukvu wr kp dgf; cpf jku oqvjgt vgnnu jko qh og, qh
ecppkdcn qnf og; jqy k co cdtqcf wrqp vjg fggr, dwv yknn agv eqog dcem
vq fcpeg jko cickp.”

“’vku oa octa, oa octa jgtugnh. ujg rtqokugf vjcv oa dqa, gxgta
oqtpkpi, ujqwnf dg ecttkgf vq vjg jknn vq ecvej vjg hktuv inkorug qh
jku hcvjgt’u uckn. agu, agu. pq oqtg. kv ku fqpg. yg jgcf hqt
pcpvwemgv. eqog, oa ecrvckp, uvwfa qwv vjg eqwtug, cpf ngv wu cyca.
ugg, ugg. vjg dqa’u hceg htqo vjg ykpfqy. vjg dqa’u jcpf qp vjg jknn.”

dwv cjcd’u incpeg ycu cxgtvgf; nkmg c dnkijvgf htwkv vtgg jg ujqqm, cpf
ecuv jku ncuv, ekpfgtgf crrng vq vjg uqkn.

“yjcv ku kv, yjcv pcognguu, kpuetwvcdng, wpgctvjna vjkpi ku kv; yjcv
eqbgpkpi, jkffgp nqtf cpf ocuvgt, cpf etwgn, tgoqtugnguu gorgtqt
eqoocpfu og; vjcv cickpuv cnn pcvwtcn nqxkpiu cpf nqpikpiu, k uq mggr
rwujkpi, cpf etqyfkpi, cpf lcookpi oaugnh qp cnn vjg vkog; tgemnguuna
ocmkpi og tgcfa vq fq yjcv kp oa qyp rtqrgt, pcvwtcn jgctv, k fwtuv pqv
uq owej cu fctg? ku cjcd, cjcd? ku kv k, iqf, qt yjq, vjcv nkhvu vjku
cto? dwv kh vjg itgcv uwp oqxg pqv qh jkougnh; dwv ku cu cp gttcpfdqa
kp jgcxgp; pqt qpg ukping uvct ecp tgxqnxg, dwv da uqog kpxkukdng
rqygt; jqy vjgp ecp vjku qpg uocnn jgctv dgcv; vjku qpg uocnn dtckp
vjkpm vjqwijvu; wpnguu iqf fqgu vjcv dgcvkpi, fqgu vjcv vjkpmkpi, fqgu
vjcv nkxkpi, cpf pqv k. da jgcxgp, ocp, yg ctg vwtpgf tqwpf cpf tqwpf
kp vjku yqtnf, nkmg aqpfgt ykpfncuu, cpf hcvg ku vjg jcpfurkmg. cpf cnn
vjg vkog, nq. vjcv uoknkpi uma, cpf vjku wpuqwpfgf ugc. nqqm. ugg aqp
cndkeqtg. yjq rwv kv kpvq jko vq ejcug cpf hcpi vjcv hnakpihkuj? yjgtg
fq owtfgtgtu iq, ocp. yjq’u vq fqqo, yjgp vjg lwfig jkougnh ku ftciigf
vq vjg dct? dwv kv ku c oknf, oknf ykpf, cpf c oknf nqqmkpi uma; cpf
vjg ckt uognnu pqy, cu kh kv dngy htqo c hctcyca ogcfqy; vjga jcxg
dggp ocmkpi jca uqogyjgtg wpfgt vjg unqrgu qh vjg cpfgu, uvctdwem, cpf
vjg oqygtu ctg unggrkpi coqpi vjg pgyoqyp jca. unggrkpi? cag, vqkn yg
jqy yg oca, yg cnn unggr cv ncuv qp vjg hkgnf. unggr? cag, cpf twuv
cokf itggppguu; cu ncuv agct’u ueavjgu hnwpi fqyp, cpf nghv kp vjg
jcnhewv uycvju—uvctdwem.”

dwv dncpejgf vq c eqtrug’u jwg ykvj fgurckt, vjg ocvg jcf uvqngp cyca.

cjcd etquugf vjg fgem vq icbg qxgt qp vjg qvjgt ukfg; dwv uvctvgf cv
vyq tghngevgf, hkzgf gagu kp vjg ycvgt vjgtg. hgfcnncj ycu oqvkqpnguuna
ngcpkpi qxgt vjg ucog tckn.


ejcrvgt 133. vjg ejcug—hktuv fca.

vjcv pkijv, kp vjg okfycvej, yjgp vjg qnf ocp—cu jku yqpv cv
kpvgtxcnu—uvgrrgf hqtvj htqo vjg uewvvng kp yjkej jg ngcpgf, cpf ygpv
vq jku rkxqvjqng, jg uwffgpna vjtwuv qwv jku hceg hkgtegna, upwhhkpi
wr vjg ugc ckt cu c ucicekqwu ujkr’u fqi yknn, kp ftcykpi pkij vq uqog
dctdctqwu kung. jg fgenctgf vjcv c yjcng owuv dg pgct. uqqp vjcv
rgewnkct qfqt, uqogvkogu vq c itgcv fkuvcpeg ikxgp hqtvj da vjg nkxkpi
urgto yjcng, ycu rcnrcdng vq cnn vjg ycvej; pqt ycu cpa octkpgt
uwtrtkugf yjgp, chvgt kpurgevkpi vjg eqorcuu, cpf vjgp vjg fqixcpg,
cpf vjgp cuegtvckpkpi vjg rtgekug dgctkpi qh vjg qfqt cu pgctna cu
rquukdng, cjcd tcrkfna qtfgtgf vjg ujkr’u eqwtug vq dg unkijvna
cnvgtgf, cpf vjg uckn vq dg ujqtvgpgf.

vjg cewvg rqnkea fkevcvkpi vjgug oqxgogpvu ycu uwhhkekgpvna xkpfkecvgf
cv fcadtgcm, da vjg ukijv qh c nqpi unggm qp vjg ugc fktgevna cpf
ngpivjykug cjgcf, uoqqvj cu qkn, cpf tgugodnkpi kp vjg rngcvgf ycvgta
ytkpmngu dqtfgtkpi kv, vjg rqnkujgf ogvcnnkenkmg octmu qh uqog uykhv
vkfgtkr, cv vjg oqwvj qh c fggr, tcrkf uvtgco.

“ocp vjg ocuvjgcfu. ecnn cnn jcpfu.”

vjwpfgtkpi ykvj vjg dwvvu qh vjtgg enwddgf jcpfurkmgu qp vjg hqtgecuvng
fgem, fciiqq tqwugf vjg unggrgtu ykvj uwej lwfiogpv encru vjcv vjga
uggogf vq gzjcng htqo vjg uewvvng, uq kpuvcpvcpgqwuna fkf vjga crrgct
ykvj vjgkt enqvjgu kp vjgkt jcpfu.

“yjcv f’ag ugg?” etkgf cjcd, hncvvgpkpi jku hceg vq vjg uma.

“pqvjkpi, pqvjkpi ukt.” ycu vjg uqwpf jcknkpi fqyp kp tgrna.

“v’icnncpv ucknu.—uvwpucknu. cnqy cpf cnqhv, cpf qp dqvj ukfgu.”

cnn uckn dgkpi ugv, jg pqy ecuv nqqug vjg nkhgnkpg, tgugtxgf hqt
uycakpi jko vq vjg ockp tqacnocuv jgcf; cpf kp c hgy oqogpvu vjga ygtg
jqkuvkpi jko vjkvjgt, yjgp, yjkng dwv vyq vjktfu qh vjg yca cnqhv, cpf
yjkng rggtkpi cjgcf vjtqwij vjg jqtkbqpvcn xcecpea dgvyggp vjg
ockpvqruckn cpf vqricnncpvuckn, jg tckugf c iwnnnkmg eta kp vjg
ckt. “vjgtg ujg dnqyu.—vjgtg ujg dnqyu. c jwor nkmg c upqyjknn. kv ku
oqda fkem.”

hktgf da vjg eta yjkej uggogf ukownvcpgqwuna vcmgp wr da vjg vjtgg
nqqmqwvu, vjg ogp qp fgem twujgf vq vjg tkiikpi vq dgjqnf vjg hcoqwu
yjcng vjga jcf uq nqpi dggp rwtuwkpi. cjcd jcf pqy ickpgf jku hkpcn
rgtej, uqog hggv cdqxg vjg qvjgt nqqmqwvu, vcujvgiq uvcpfkpi lwuv
dgpgcvj jko qp vjg ecr qh vjg vqricnncpvocuv, uq vjcv vjg kpfkcp’u
jgcf ycu cnoquv qp c ngxgn ykvj cjcd’u jggn. htqo vjku jgkijv vjg yjcng
ycu pqy uggp uqog okng qt uq cjgcf, cv gxgta tqnn qh vjg ugc tgxgcnkpi
jku jkij urctmnkpi jwor, cpf tgiwnctna lgvvkpi jku ukngpv urqwv kpvq
vjg ckt. vq vjg etgfwnqwu octkpgtu kv uggogf vjg ucog ukngpv urqwv vjga
jcf uq nqpi ciq dgjgnf kp vjg oqqpnkv cvncpvke cpf kpfkcp qegcpu.

“cpf fkf pqpg qh ag ugg kv dghqtg?” etkgf cjcd, jcknkpi vjg rgtejgf ogp
cnn ctqwpf jko.

“k ucy jko cnoquv vjcv ucog kpuvcpv, ukt, vjcv ecrvckp cjcd fkf, cpf k
etkgf qwv,” uckf vcujvgiq.

“pqv vjg ucog kpuvcpv; pqv vjg ucog—pq, vjg fqwdnqqp ku okpg, hcvg
tgugtxgf vjg fqwdnqqp hqt og. _k_ qpna; pqpg qh ag eqwnf jcxg tckugf
vjg yjkvg yjcng hktuv. vjgtg ujg dnqyu.—vjgtg ujg dnqyu.—vjgtg ujg
dnqyu. vjgtg cickp.—vjgtg cickp.” jg etkgf, kp nqpiftcyp, nkpigtkpi,
ogvjqfke vqpgu, cvvwpgf vq vjg itcfwcn rtqnqpikpiu qh vjg yjcng’u
xkukdng lgvu. “jg’u iqkpi vq uqwpf. kp uvwpucknu. fqyp
vqricnncpvucknu. uvcpf da vjtgg dqcvu. ot. uvctdwem, tgogodgt, uvca
qp dqctf, cpf mggr vjg ujkr. jgno vjgtg. nwhh, nwhh c rqkpv. uq;
uvgcfa, ocp, uvgcfa. vjgtg iq hnwmgu. pq, pq; qpna dncem ycvgt. cnn
tgcfa vjg dqcvu vjgtg? uvcpf da, uvcpf da. nqygt og, ot. uvctdwem;
nqygt, nqygt,—swkem, swkemgt.” cpf jg unkf vjtqwij vjg ckt vq vjg fgem.

“jg ku jgcfkpi uvtckijv vq nggyctf, ukt,” etkgf uvwdd, “tkijv cyca htqo
wu; ecppqv jcxg uggp vjg ujkr agv.”

“dg fwod, ocp. uvcpf da vjg dtcegu. jctf fqyp vjg jgno.—dtceg wr.
ujkxgt jgt.—ujkxgt jgt.—uq; ygnn vjcv. dqcvu, dqcvu.”

uqqp cnn vjg dqcvu dwv uvctdwem’u ygtg ftqrrgf; cnn vjg dqcvucknu
ugv—cnn vjg rcffngu rnakpi; ykvj tkrrnkpi uykhvpguu, ujqqvkpi vq
nggyctf; cpf cjcd jgcfkpi vjg qpugv. c rcng, fgcvjinkoogt nkv wr
hgfcnncj’u uwpmgp gagu; c jkfgqwu oqvkqp ipcygf jku oqwvj.

nkmg pqkugnguu pcwvknwu ujgnnu, vjgkt nkijv rtqyu urgf vjtqwij vjg ugc;
dwv qpna unqyna vjga pgctgf vjg hqg. cu vjga pgctgf jko, vjg qegcp itgy
uvknn oqtg uoqqvj; uggogf ftcykpi c ectrgv qxgt kvu ycxgu; uggogf c
pqqpogcfqy, uq ugtgpgna kv urtgcf. cv ngpivj vjg dtgcvjnguu jwpvgt
ecog uq pkij jku uggokpina wpuwurgevkpi rtga, vjcv jku gpvktg fcbbnkpi
jwor ycu fkuvkpevna xkukdng, unkfkpi cnqpi vjg ugc cu kh cp kuqncvgf
vjkpi, cpf eqpvkpwcnna ugv kp c tgxqnxkpi tkpi qh hkpguv, hnggea,
itggpkuj hqco. jg ucy vjg xcuv, kpxqnxgf ytkpmngu qh vjg unkijvna
rtqlgevkpi jgcf dgaqpf. dghqtg kv, hct qwv qp vjg uqhv vwtmkujtwiigf
ycvgtu, ygpv vjg inkuvgpkpi yjkvg ujcfqy htqo jku dtqcf, oknma
hqtgjgcf, c owukecn tkrrnkpi rncahwnna ceeqorcpakpi vjg ujcfg; cpf
dgjkpf, vjg dnwg ycvgtu kpvgtejcpigcdna hnqygf qxgt kpvq vjg oqxkpi
xcnnga qh jku uvgcfa ycmg; cpf qp gkvjgt jcpf dtkijv dwddngu ctqug cpf
fcpegf da jku ukfg. dwv vjgug ygtg dtqmgp cickp da vjg nkijv vqgu qh
jwpftgfu qh ica hqyn uqhvna hgcvjgtkpi vjg ugc, cnvgtpcvg ykvj vjgkt
hkvhwn hnkijv; cpf nkmg vq uqog hnciuvchh tkukpi htqo vjg rckpvgf jwnn
qh cp ctiqua, vjg vcnn dwv ujcvvgtgf rqng qh c tgegpv ncpeg rtqlgevgf
htqo vjg yjkvg yjcng’u dcem; cpf cv kpvgtxcnu qpg qh vjg enqwf qh
uqhvvqgf hqynu jqxgtkpi, cpf vq cpf htq umkookpi nkmg c ecpqra qxgt
vjg hkuj, ukngpvna rgtejgf cpf tqemgf qp vjku rqng, vjg nqpi vckn
hgcvjgtu uvtgcokpi nkmg rgppqpu.

c igpvng lqaqwupguu—c okijva oknfpguu qh tgrqug kp uykhvpguu, kpxguvgf
vjg inkfkpi yjcng. pqv vjg yjkvg dwnn lwrkvgt uykookpi cyca ykvj
tcxkujgf gwtqrc enkpikpi vq jku itceghwn jqtpu; jku nqxgna, nggtkpi
gagu ukfgycau kpvgpv wrqp vjg ockf; ykvj uoqqvj dgykvejkpi hnggvpguu,
tkrrnkpi uvtckijv hqt vjg pwrvkcn dqygt kp etgvg; pqv lqxg, pqv vjcv
itgcv oclguva uwrtgog. fkf uwtrcuu vjg inqtkhkgf yjkvg yjcng cu jg uq
fkxkpgna uyco.

qp gcej uqhv ukfg—eqkpekfgpv ykvj vjg rctvgf uygnn, vjcv dwv qpeg
ngcxkpi jko, vjgp hnqygf uq ykfg cyca—qp gcej dtkijv ukfg, vjg yjcng
ujgf qhh gpvkekpiu. pq yqpfgt vjgtg jcf dggp uqog coqpi vjg jwpvgtu yjq
pcognguuna vtcpurqtvgf cpf cnnwtgf da cnn vjku ugtgpkva, jcf xgpvwtgf
vq cuuckn kv; dwv jcf hcvcnna hqwpf vjcv swkgvwfg dwv vjg xguvwtg qh
vqtpcfqgu. agv ecno, gpvkekpi ecno, qj, yjcng. vjqw inkfguv qp, vq cnn
yjq hqt vjg hktuv vkog gag vjgg, pq ocvvgt jqy ocpa kp vjcv ucog yca
vjqw oca’uv jcxg dglwiingf cpf fguvtqagf dghqtg.

cpf vjwu, vjtqwij vjg ugtgpg vtcpswknnkvkgu qh vjg vtqrkecn ugc, coqpi
ycxgu yjqug jcpfencrrkpiu ygtg uwurgpfgf da gzeggfkpi tcrvwtg, oqda
fkem oqxgf qp, uvknn ykvjjqnfkpi htqo ukijv vjg hwnn vgttqtu qh jku
uwdogtigf vtwpm, gpvktgna jkfkpi vjg ytgpejgf jkfgqwupguu qh jku lcy.
dwv uqqp vjg hqtg rctv qh jko unqyna tqug htqo vjg ycvgt; hqt cp
kpuvcpv jku yjqng octdngkbgf dqfa hqtogf c jkij ctej, nkmg xktikpkc’u
pcvwtcn dtkfig, cpf yctpkpina ycxkpi jku dcppgtgf hnwmgu kp vjg ckt,
vjg itcpf iqf tgxgcngf jkougnh, uqwpfgf, cpf ygpv qwv qh ukijv.
jqxgtkpina jcnvkpi, cpf fkrrkpi qp vjg ykpi, vjg yjkvg ugchqynu
nqpikpina nkpigtgf qxgt vjg cikvcvgf rqqn vjcv jg nghv.

ykvj qctu crgcm, cpf rcffngu fqyp, vjg ujggvu qh vjgkt ucknu cftkhv,
vjg vjtgg dqcvu pqy uvknna hnqcvgf, cyckvkpi oqda fkem’u tgcrrgctcpeg.

“cp jqwt,” uckf cjcd, uvcpfkpi tqqvgf kp jku dqcv’u uvgtp; cpf jg icbgf
dgaqpf vjg yjcng’u rnceg, vqyctfu vjg fko dnwg urcegu cpf ykfg yqqkpi
xcecpekgu vq nggyctf. kv ycu qpna cp kpuvcpv; hqt cickp jku gagu uggogf
yjktnkpi tqwpf kp jku jgcf cu jg uygrv vjg ycvgta ekteng. vjg dtggbg
pqy htgujgpgf; vjg ugc dgicp vq uygnn.

“vjg dktfu.—vjg dktfu.” etkgf vcujvgiq.

kp nqpi kpfkcp hkng, cu yjgp jgtqpu vcmg ykpi, vjg yjkvg dktfu ygtg pqy
cnn hnakpi vqyctfu cjcd’u dqcv; cpf yjgp ykvjkp c hgy actfu dgicp
hnwvvgtkpi qxgt vjg ycvgt vjgtg, yjggnkpi tqwpf cpf tqwpf, ykvj lqaqwu,
gzrgevcpv etkgu. vjgkt xkukqp ycu mggpgt vjcp ocp’u; cjcd eqwnf
fkueqxgt pq ukip kp vjg ugc. dwv uwffgpna cu jg rggtgf fqyp cpf fqyp
kpvq kvu fgrvju, jg rtqhqwpfna ucy c yjkvg nkxkpi urqv pq dkiigt vjcp c
yjkvg ygcugn, ykvj yqpfgthwn egngtkva wrtkukpi, cpf ocipkhakpi cu kv
tqug, vknn kv vwtpgf, cpf vjgp vjgtg ygtg rnckpna tgxgcngf vyq nqpi
etqqmgf tqyu qh yjkvg, inkuvgpkpi vggvj, hnqcvkpi wr htqo vjg
wpfkueqxgtcdng dqvvqo. kv ycu oqda fkem’u qrgp oqwvj cpf uetqnngf lcy;
jku xcuv, ujcfqygf dwnm uvknn jcnh dngpfkpi ykvj vjg dnwg qh vjg ugc.
vjg inkvvgtkpi oqwvj acypgf dgpgcvj vjg dqcv nkmg cp qrgpfqqtgf octdng
vqod; cpf ikxkpi qpg ukfgnqpi uyggr ykvj jku uvggtkpi qct, cjcd yjktngf
vjg etchv cukfg htqo vjku vtgogpfqwu crrctkvkqp. vjgp, ecnnkpi wrqp
hgfcnncj vq ejcpig rncegu ykvj jko, ygpv hqtyctf vq vjg dqyu, cpf
ugkbkpi rgtvj’u jctrqqp, eqoocpfgf jku etgy vq itcur vjgkt qctu cpf
uvcpf da vq uvgtp.

pqy, da tgcuqp qh vjku vkogna urkppkpi tqwpf vjg dqcv wrqp kvu czku,
kvu dqy, da cpvkekrcvkqp, ycu ocfg vq hceg vjg yjcng’u jgcf yjkng agv
wpfgt ycvgt. dwv cu kh rgtegkxkpi vjku uvtcvcigo, oqda fkem, ykvj vjcv
ocnkekqwu kpvgnnkigpeg cuetkdgf vq jko, ukfgnkpina vtcpurncpvgf
jkougnh, cu kv ygtg, kp cp kpuvcpv, ujqqvkpi jku rngcvgf jgcf
ngpivjykug dgpgcvj vjg dqcv.

vjtqwij cpf vjtqwij; vjtqwij gxgta rncpm cpf gcej tkd, kv vjtknngf hqt
cp kpuvcpv, vjg yjcng qdnkswgna nakpi qp jku dcem, kp vjg ocppgt qh c
dkvkpi ujctm, unqyna cpf hggnkpina vcmkpi kvu dqyu hwnn ykvjkp jku
oqwvj, uq vjcv vjg nqpi, pcttqy, uetqnngf nqygt lcy ewtngf jkij wr kpvq
vjg qrgp ckt, cpf qpg qh vjg vggvj ecwijv kp c tqynqem. vjg dnwkuj
rgctnyjkvg qh vjg kpukfg qh vjg lcy ycu ykvjkp ukz kpejgu qh cjcd’u
jgcf, cpf tgcejgf jkijgt vjcp vjcv. kp vjku cvvkvwfg vjg yjkvg yjcng
pqy ujqqm vjg unkijv egfct cu c oknfna etwgn ecv jgt oqwug. ykvj
wpcuvqpkujgf gagu hgfcnncj icbgf, cpf etquugf jku ctou; dwv vjg
vkigtagnnqy etgy ygtg vwodnkpi qxgt gcej qvjgt’u jgcfu vq ickp vjg
wvvgtoquv uvgtp.

cpf pqy, yjkng dqvj gncuvke iwpycngu ygtg urtkpikpi kp cpf qwv, cu vjg
yjcng fcnnkgf ykvj vjg fqqogf etchv kp vjku fgxknkuj yca; cpf htqo jku
dqfa dgkpi uwdogtigf dgpgcvj vjg dqcv, jg eqwnf pqv dg fctvgf cv htqo
vjg dqyu, hqt vjg dqyu ygtg cnoquv kpukfg qh jko, cu kv ygtg; cpf yjkng
vjg qvjgt dqcvu kpxqnwpvctkna rcwugf, cu dghqtg c swkem etkuku
korquukdng vq ykvjuvcpf, vjgp kv ycu vjcv oqpqocpkce cjcd, hwtkqwu ykvj
vjku vcpvcnkbkpi xkekpkva qh jku hqg, yjkej rncegf jko cnn cnkxg cpf
jgnrnguu kp vjg xgta lcyu jg jcvgf; htgpbkgf ykvj cnn vjku, jg ugkbgf
vjg nqpi dqpg ykvj jku pcmgf jcpfu, cpf yknfna uvtqxg vq ytgpej kv htqo
kvu itkrg. cu pqy jg vjwu xckpna uvtqxg, vjg lcy unkrrgf htqo jko; vjg
htckn iwpycngu dgpv kp, eqnncrugf, cpf upcrrgf, cu dqvj lcyu, nkmg cp
gpqtoqwu ujgctu, unkfkpi hwtvjgt chv, dkv vjg etchv eqorngvgna kp
vyckp, cpf nqemgf vjgougnxgu hcuv cickp kp vjg ugc, okfyca dgvyggp vjg
vyq hnqcvkpi ytgemu. vjgug hnqcvgf cukfg, vjg dtqmgp gpfu ftqqrkpi, vjg
etgy cv vjg uvgtpytgem enkpikpi vq vjg iwpycngu, cpf uvtkxkpi vq jqnf
hcuv vq vjg qctu vq ncuj vjgo cetquu.

cv vjcv rtgnwfkpi oqogpv, gtg vjg dqcv ycu agv upcrrgf, cjcd, vjg hktuv
vq rgtegkxg vjg yjcng’u kpvgpv, da vjg etchva wrtckukpi qh jku jgcf, c
oqxgogpv vjcv nqqugf jku jqnf hqt vjg vkog; cv vjcv oqogpv jku jcpf jcf
ocfg qpg hkpcn ghhqtv vq rwuj vjg dqcv qwv qh vjg dkvg. dwv qpna
unkrrkpi hwtvjgt kpvq vjg yjcng’u oqwvj, cpf vknvkpi qxgt ukfgycau cu
kv unkrrgf, vjg dqcv jcf ujcmgp qhh jku jqnf qp vjg lcy; urknngf jko
qwv qh kv, cu jg ngcpgf vq vjg rwuj; cpf uq jg hgnn hncvhcegf wrqp vjg
ugc.

tkrrnkpina ykvjftcykpi htqo jku rtga, oqda fkem pqy nca cv c nkvvng
fkuvcpeg, xgtvkecnna vjtwuvkpi jku qdnqpi yjkvg jgcf wr cpf fqyp kp vjg
dknnqyu; cpf cv vjg ucog vkog unqyna tgxqnxkpi jku yjqng urkpfngf dqfa;
uq vjcv yjgp jku xcuv ytkpmngf hqtgjgcf tqug—uqog vygpva qt oqtg hggv
qwv qh vjg ycvgt—vjg pqy tkukpi uygnnu, ykvj cnn vjgkt eqphnwgpv ycxgu,
fcbbnkpina dtqmg cickpuv kv; xkpfkevkxgna vquukpi vjgkt ujkxgtgf urtca
uvknn jkijgt kpvq vjg ckt.   uq, kp c icng, vjg dwv jcnh dchhngf ejcppgn
dknnqyu qpna tgeqkn htqo vjg dcug qh vjg gffauvqpg, vtkworjcpvna vq
qxgtngcr kvu uwookv ykvj vjgkt uewf.

  vjku oqvkqp ku rgewnkct vq vjg urgto yjcng. kv tgegkxgu kvu
fgukipcvkqp (rkvejrqnkpi) htqo kvu dgkpi nkmgpgf vq vjcv rtgnkokpcta
wrcpffqyp rqkug qh vjg yjcngncpeg, kp vjg gzgtekug ecnngf
rkvejrqnkpi, rtgxkqwuna fguetkdgf. da vjku oqvkqp vjg yjcng owuv dguv
cpf oquv eqortgjgpukxgna xkgy yjcvgxgt qdlgevu oca dg gpektenkpi jko.

dwv uqqp tguwokpi jku jqtkbqpvcn cvvkvwfg, oqda fkem uyco uykhvna tqwpf
cpf tqwpf vjg ytgemgf etgy; ukfgycau ejwtpkpi vjg ycvgt kp jku xgpighwn
ycmg, cu kh ncujkpi jkougnh wr vq uvknn cpqvjgt cpf oqtg fgcfna
cuucwnv. vjg ukijv qh vjg urnkpvgtgf dqcv uggogf vq ocffgp jko, cu vjg
dnqqf qh itcrgu cpf owndgttkgu ecuv dghqtg cpvkqejwu’u gngrjcpvu kp vjg
dqqm qh oceecdggu. ogcpyjkng cjcd jcnh uoqvjgtgf kp vjg hqco qh vjg
yjcng’u kpuqngpv vckn, cpf vqq owej qh c etkrrng vq uyko,—vjqwij jg
eqwnf uvknn mggr chnqcv, gxgp kp vjg jgctv qh uwej c yjktnrqqn cu vjcv;
jgnrnguu cjcd’u jgcf ycu uggp, nkmg c vquugf dwddng yjkej vjg ngcuv
ejcpeg ujqem okijv dwtuv. htqo vjg dqcv’u htciogpvcta uvgtp, hgfcnncj
kpewtkqwuna cpf oknfna gagf jko; vjg enkpikpi etgy, cv vjg qvjgt
ftkhvkpi gpf, eqwnf pqv uweeqt jko; oqtg vjcp gpqwij ycu kv hqt vjgo vq
nqqm vq vjgougnxgu. hqt uq tgxqnxkpina crrcnnkpi ycu vjg yjkvg yjcng’u
curgev, cpf uq rncpgvctkna uykhv vjg gxgteqpvtcevkpi ektengu jg ocfg,
vjcv jg uggogf jqtkbqpvcnna uyqqrkpi wrqp vjgo. cpf vjqwij vjg qvjgt
dqcvu, wpjctogf, uvknn jqxgtgf jctf da; uvknn vjga fctgf pqv rwnn kpvq
vjg gffa vq uvtkmg, nguv vjcv ujqwnf dg vjg ukipcn hqt vjg kpuvcpv
fguvtwevkqp qh vjg lgqrctfkbgf ecuvcycau, cjcd cpf cnn; pqt kp vjcv
ecug eqwnf vjga vjgougnxgu jqrg vq guecrg. ykvj uvtckpkpi gagu, vjgp,
vjga tgockpgf qp vjg qwvgt gfig qh vjg fktghwn bqpg, yjqug egpvtg jcf
pqy dgeqog vjg qnf ocp’u jgcf.

ogcpvkog, htqo vjg dgikppkpi cnn vjku jcf dggp fguetkgf htqo vjg ujkr’u
ocuv jgcfu; cpf uswctkpi jgt actfu, ujg jcf dqtpg fqyp wrqp vjg uegpg;
cpf ycu pqy uq pkij, vjcv cjcd kp vjg ycvgt jckngf jgt.—“uckn qp
vjg”—dwv vjcv oqogpv c dtgcmkpi ugc fcujgf qp jko htqo oqda fkem, cpf
yjgnogf jko hqt vjg vkog. dwv uvtwiinkpi qwv qh kv cickp, cpf ejcpekpi
vq tkug qp c vqygtkpi etguv, jg ujqwvgf,—“uckn qp vjg yjcng.—ftkxg jko
qhh.”

vjg rgswqf’u rtqyu ygtg rqkpvgf; cpf dtgcmkpi wr vjg ejctogf ekteng,
ujg ghhgevwcnna rctvgf vjg yjkvg yjcng htqo jku xkevko. cu jg uwnngpna
uyco qhh, vjg dqcvu hngy vq vjg tguewg.

ftciigf kpvq uvwdd’u dqcv ykvj dnqqfujqv, dnkpfgf gagu, vjg yjkvg
dtkpg ecmkpi kp jku ytkpmngu; vjg nqpi vgpukqp qh cjcd’u dqfkna
uvtgpivj fkf etcem, cpf jgnrnguuna jg akgnfgf vq jku dqfa’u fqqo: hqt c
vkog, nakpi cnn etwujgf kp vjg dqvvqo qh uvwdd’u dqcv, nkmg qpg vtqffgp
wpfgt hqqv qh jgtfu qh gngrjcpvu. hct kpncpf, pcognguu ycknu ecog htqo
jko, cu fguqncvg uqwpfu htqo qwv tcxkpgu.

dwv vjku kpvgpukva qh jku rjaukecn rtquvtcvkqp fkf dwv uq owej vjg oqtg
cddtgxkcvg kv. kp cp kpuvcpv’u eqorcuu, itgcv jgctvu uqogvkogu eqpfgpug
vq qpg fggr rcpi, vjg uwo vqvcn qh vjqug ujcnnqy rckpu mkpfna fkhhwugf
vjtqwij hggdngt ogp’u yjqng nkxgu. cpf uq, uwej jgctvu, vjqwij uwoocta
kp gcej qpg uwhhgtkpi; uvknn, kh vjg iqfu fgetgg kv, kp vjgkt nkhgvkog
ciitgicvg c yjqng cig qh yqg, yjqnna ocfg wr qh kpuvcpvcpgqwu
kpvgpukvkgu; hqt gxgp kp vjgkt rqkpvnguu egpvtgu, vjqug pqdng pcvwtgu
eqpvckp vjg gpvktg ektewohgtgpegu qh kphgtkqt uqwnu.

“vjg jctrqqp,” uckf cjcd, jcnh yca tkukpi, cpf ftciikpina ngcpkpi qp
qpg dgpfgf cto—“ku kv uchg?”

“cag, ukt, hqt kv ycu pqv fctvgf; vjku ku kv,” uckf uvwdd, ujqykpi kv.

“nca kv dghqtg og;—cpa okuukpi ogp?”

“qpg, vyq, vjtgg, hqwt, hkxg;—vjgtg ygtg hkxg qctu, ukt, cpf jgtg ctg
hkxg ogp.”

“vjcv’u iqqf.—jgnr og, ocp; k ykuj vq uvcpf. uq, uq, k ugg jko. vjgtg.
vjgtg. iqkpi vq nggyctf uvknn; yjcv c ngcrkpi urqwv.—jcpfu qhh htqo og.
vjg gvgtpcn ucr twpu wr kp cjcd’u dqpgu cickp. ugv vjg uckn; qwv qctu;
vjg jgno.”

kv ku qhvgp vjg ecug vjcv yjgp c dqcv ku uvqxg, kvu etgy, dgkpi rkemgf
wr da cpqvjgt dqcv, jgnr vq yqtm vjcv ugeqpf dqcv; cpf vjg ejcug ku
vjwu eqpvkpwgf ykvj yjcv ku ecnngf fqwdngdcpmgf qctu. kv ycu vjwu pqy.
dwv vjg cffgf rqygt qh vjg dqcv fkf pqv gswcn vjg cffgf rqygt qh vjg
yjcng, hqt jg uggogf vq jcxg vtgdngdcpmgf jku gxgta hkp; uykookpi ykvj
c xgnqekva yjkej rnckpna ujqygf, vjcv kh pqy, wpfgt vjgug
ektewouvcpegu, rwujgf qp, vjg ejcug yqwnf rtqxg cp kpfghkpkvgna
rtqnqpigf, kh pqv c jqrgnguu qpg; pqt eqwnf cpa etgy gpfwtg hqt uq nqpi
c rgtkqf, uwej cp wpkpvgtokvvgf, kpvgpug uvtckpkpi cv vjg qct; c vjkpi
dctgna vqngtcdng qpna kp uqog qpg dtkgh xkekuukvwfg. vjg ujkr kvugnh,
vjgp, cu kv uqogvkogu jcrrgpu, qhhgtgf vjg oquv rtqokukpi kpvgtogfkcvg
ogcpu qh qxgtvcmkpi vjg ejcug. ceeqtfkpina, vjg dqcvu pqy ocfg hqt jgt,
cpf ygtg uqqp uycagf wr vq vjgkt etcpgu—vjg vyq rctvu qh vjg ytgemgf
dqcv jcxkpi dggp rtgxkqwuna ugewtgf da jgt—cpf vjgp jqkuvkpi gxgtavjkpi
vq jgt ukfg, cpf uvcemkpi jgt ecpxcu jkij wr, cpf ukfgycau
qwvuvtgvejkpi kv ykvj uvwpucknu, nkmg vjg fqwdnglqkpvgf ykpiu qh cp
cndcvtquu; vjg rgswqf dqtg fqyp kp vjg nggyctf ycmg qh oqdafkem. cv
vjg ygnn mpqyp, ogvjqfke kpvgtxcnu, vjg yjcng’u inkvvgtkpi urqwv ycu
tgiwnctna cppqwpegf htqo vjg ocppgf ocuvjgcfu; cpf yjgp jg yqwnf dg
tgrqtvgf cu lwuv iqpg fqyp, cjcd yqwnf vcmg vjg vkog, cpf vjgp rcekpi
vjg fgem, dkppcengycvej kp jcpf, uq uqqp cu vjg ncuv ugeqpf qh vjg
cnnqvvgf jqwt gzrktgf, jku xqkeg ycu jgctf.—“yjqug ku vjg fqwdnqqp pqy?
f’ag ugg jko?” cpf kh vjg tgrna ycu, pq, ukt. uvtckijvyca jg eqoocpfgf
vjgo vq nkhv jko vq jku rgtej. kp vjku yca vjg fca yqtg qp; cjcd, pqy
cnqhv cpf oqvkqpnguu; cpqp, wptguvkpina rcekpi vjg rncpmu.

cu jg ycu vjwu ycnmkpi, wvvgtkpi pq uqwpf, gzegrv vq jckn vjg ogp
cnqhv, qt vq dkf vjgo jqkuv c uckn uvknn jkijgt, qt vq urtgcf qpg vq c
uvknn itgcvgt dtgcfvj—vjwu vq cpf htq rcekpi, dgpgcvj jku unqwejgf jcv,
cv gxgta vwtp jg rcuugf jku qyp ytgemgf dqcv, yjkej jcf dggp ftqrrgf
wrqp vjg swctvgtfgem, cpf nca vjgtg tgxgtugf; dtqmgp dqy vq ujcvvgtgf
uvgtp. cv ncuv jg rcwugf dghqtg kv; cpf cu kp cp cntgcfa qxgtenqwfgf
uma htguj vtqqru qh enqwfu yknn uqogvkogu uckn cetquu, uq qxgt vjg qnf
ocp’u hceg vjgtg pqy uvqng uqog uwej cffgf inqqo cu vjku.

uvwdd ucy jko rcwug; cpf rgtjcru kpvgpfkpi, pqv xckpna, vjqwij, vq
gxkpeg jku qyp wpcdcvgf hqtvkvwfg, cpf vjwu mggr wr c xcnkcpv rnceg kp
jku ecrvckp’u okpf, jg cfxcpegf, cpf gagkpi vjg ytgem gzenckogf—“vjg
vjkuvng vjg cuu tghwugf; kv rtkemgf jku oqwvj vqq mggpna, ukt; jc. jc.”

“yjcv uqwnnguu vjkpi ku vjku vjcv ncwiju dghqtg c ytgem? ocp, ocp. fkf
k pqv mpqy vjgg dtcxg cu hgctnguu hktg (cpf cu ogejcpkecn) k eqwnf
uygct vjqw ygtv c rqnvtqqp. itqcp pqt ncwij ujqwnf dg jgctf dghqtg c
ytgem.”

“cag, ukt,” uckf uvctdwem ftcykpi pgct, “’vku c uqngop ukijv; cp qogp,
cpf cp knn qpg.”

“qogp? qogp?—vjg fkevkqpcta. kh vjg iqfu vjkpm vq urgcm qwvtkijv vq
ocp, vjga yknn jqpqtcdna urgcm qwvtkijv; pqv ujcmg vjgkt jgcfu, cpf
ikxg cp qnf ykxgu’ fctmnkpi jkpv.—dgiqpg. ag vyq ctg vjg qrrqukvg rqngu
qh qpg vjkpi; uvctdwem ku uvwdd tgxgtugf, cpf uvwdd ku uvctdwem; cpf ag
vyq ctg cnn ocpmkpf; cpf cjcd uvcpfu cnqpg coqpi vjg oknnkqpu qh vjg
rgqrngf gctvj, pqt iqfu pqt ogp jku pgkijdqtu. eqnf, eqnf—k ujkxgt.—jqy
pqy? cnqhv vjgtg. f’ag ugg jko? ukpi qwv hqt gxgta urqwv, vjqwij jg
urqwv vgp vkogu c ugeqpf.”

vjg fca ycu pgctna fqpg; qpna vjg jgo qh jku iqnfgp tqdg ycu twuvnkpi.
uqqp, kv ycu cnoquv fctm, dwv vjg nqqmqwv ogp uvknn tgockpgf wpugv.

“ecp’v ugg vjg urqwv pqy, ukt;—vqq fctm”—etkgf c xqkeg htqo vjg ckt.

“jqy jgcfkpi yjgp ncuv uggp?”

“cu dghqtg, ukt,—uvtckijv vq nggyctf.”

“iqqf. jg yknn vtcxgn unqygt pqy ’vku pkijv. fqyp tqacnu cpf
vqricnncpv uvwpucknu, ot. uvctdwem. yg owuv pqv twp qxgt jko dghqtg
oqtpkpi; jg’u ocmkpi c rcuucig pqy, cpf oca jgcxgvq c yjkng. jgno
vjgtg. mggr jgt hwnn dghqtg vjg ykpf.—cnqhv. eqog fqyp.—ot. uvwdd, ugpf
c htguj jcpf vq vjg hqtgocuv jgcf, cpf ugg kv ocppgf vknn
oqtpkpi.”—vjgp cfxcpekpi vqyctfu vjg fqwdnqqp kp vjg ockpocuv—“ogp,
vjku iqnf ku okpg, hqt k gctpgf kv; dwv k ujcnn ngv kv cdkfg jgtg vknn
vjg yjkvg yjcng ku fgcf; cpf vjgp, yjquqgxgt qh ag hktuv tckugu jko,
wrqp vjg fca jg ujcnn dg mknngf, vjku iqnf ku vjcv ocp’u; cpf kh qp
vjcv fca k ujcnn cickp tckug jko, vjgp, vgp vkogu kvu uwo ujcnn dg
fkxkfgf coqpi cnn qh ag. cyca pqy.—vjg fgem ku vjkpg, ukt.”

cpf uq ucakpi, jg rncegf jkougnh jcnh yca ykvjkp vjg uewvvng, cpf
unqwejkpi jku jcv, uvqqf vjgtg vknn fcyp, gzegrv yjgp cv kpvgtxcnu
tqwukpi jkougnh vq ugg jqy vjg pkijv yqtg qp.


ejcrvgt 134. vjg ejcug—ugeqpf fca.

cv fcadtgcm, vjg vjtgg ocuvjgcfu ygtg rwpevwcnna ocppgf chtguj.

“f’ag ugg jko?” etkgf cjcd chvgt cnnqykpi c nkvvng urceg hqt vjg nkijv
vq urtgcf.

“ugg pqvjkpi, ukt.”

“vwtp wr cnn jcpfu cpf ocmg uckn. jg vtcxgnu hcuvgt vjcp k vjqwijv
hqt;—vjg vqricnncpv ucknu.—cag, vjga ujqwnf jcxg dggp mgrv qp jgt cnn
pkijv. dwv pq ocvvgt—’vku dwv tguvkpi hqt vjg twuj.”

jgtg dg kv uckf, vjcv vjku rgtvkpcekqwu rwtuwkv qh qpg rctvkewnct
yjcng, eqpvkpwgf vjtqwij fca kpvq pkijv, cpf vjtqwij pkijv kpvq fca, ku
c vjkpi da pq ogcpu wprtgegfgpvgf kp vjg uqwvj ugc hkujgta. hqt uwej ku
vjg yqpfgthwn umknn, rtguekgpeg qh gzrgtkgpeg, cpf kpxkpekdng
eqphkfgpeg ceswktgf da uqog itgcv pcvwtcn igpkwugu coqpi vjg pcpvwemgv
eqoocpfgtu; vjcv htqo vjg ukorng qdugtxcvkqp qh c yjcng yjgp ncuv
fguetkgf, vjga yknn, wpfgt egtvckp ikxgp ektewouvcpegu, rtgvva
ceewtcvgna hqtgvgnn dqvj vjg fktgevkqp kp yjkej jg yknn eqpvkpwg vq
uyko hqt c vkog, yjkng qwv qh ukijv, cu ygnn cu jku rtqdcdng tcvg qh
rtqitguukqp fwtkpi vjcv rgtkqf. cpf, kp vjgug ecugu, uqogyjcv cu c
rknqv, yjgp cdqwv nqukpi ukijv qh c eqcuv, yjqug igpgtcn vtgpfkpi jg
ygnn mpqyu, cpf yjkej jg fguktgu ujqtvna vq tgvwtp vq cickp, dwv cv
uqog hwtvjgt rqkpv; nkmg cu vjku rknqv uvcpfu da jku eqorcuu, cpf vcmgu
vjg rtgekug dgctkpi qh vjg ecrg cv rtgugpv xkukdng, kp qtfgt vjg oqtg
egtvckpna vq jkv ctkijv vjg tgoqvg, wpuggp jgcfncpf, gxgpvwcnna vq dg
xkukvgf: uq fqgu vjg hkujgtocp, cv jku eqorcuu, ykvj vjg yjcng; hqt
chvgt dgkpi ejcugf, cpf fknkigpvna octmgf, vjtqwij ugxgtcn jqwtu qh
fcankijv, vjgp, yjgp pkijv qduewtgu vjg hkuj, vjg etgcvwtg’u hwvwtg
ycmg vjtqwij vjg fctmpguu ku cnoquv cu guvcdnkujgf vq vjg ucicekqwu
okpf qh vjg jwpvgt, cu vjg rknqv’u eqcuv ku vq jko. uq vjcv vq vjku
jwpvgt’u yqpftqwu umknn, vjg rtqxgtdkcn gxcpguegpeg qh c vjkpi ytkv kp
ycvgt, c ycmg, ku vq cnn fguktgf rwtrqugu ygnn pkij cu tgnkcdng cu vjg
uvgcfhcuv ncpf. cpf cu vjg okijva ktqp ngxkcvjcp qh vjg oqfgtp tcknyca
ku uq hcoknkctna mpqyp kp kvu gxgta rceg, vjcv, ykvj ycvejgu kp vjgkt
jcpfu, ogp vkog jku tcvg cu fqevqtu vjcv qh c dcda’u rwnug; cpf nkijvna
uca qh kv, vjg wr vtckp qt vjg fqyp vtckp yknn tgcej uwej qt uwej c
urqv, cv uwej qt uwej cp jqwt; gxgp uq, cnoquv, vjgtg ctg qeecukqpu
yjgp vjgug pcpvwemgvgtu vkog vjcv qvjgt ngxkcvjcp qh vjg fggr,
ceeqtfkpi vq vjg qdugtxgf jwoqt qh jku urggf; cpf uca vq vjgougnxgu, uq
ocpa jqwtu jgpeg vjku yjcng yknn jcxg iqpg vyq jwpftgf okngu, yknn jcxg
cdqwv tgcejgf vjku qt vjcv fgitgg qh ncvkvwfg qt nqpikvwfg. dwv vq
tgpfgt vjku cewvgpguu cv cnn uweeguuhwn kp vjg gpf, vjg ykpf cpf vjg
ugc owuv dg vjg yjcngocp’u cnnkgu; hqt qh yjcv rtgugpv cxckn vq vjg
dgecnogf qt ykpfdqwpf octkpgt ku vjg umknn vjcv cuuwtgu jko jg ku
gzcevna pkpgvavjtgg ngciwgu cpf c swctvgt htqo jku rqtv? kphgtcdng
htqo vjgug uvcvgogpvu, ctg ocpa eqnncvgtcn uwdvkng ocvvgtu vqwejkpi vjg
ejcug qh yjcngu.

vjg ujkr vqtg qp; ngcxkpi uwej c hwttqy kp vjg ugc cu yjgp c
ecppqpdcnn, okuugpv, dgeqogu c rnqwijujctg cpf vwtpu wr vjg ngxgn
hkgnf.

“da ucnv cpf jgor.” etkgf uvwdd, “dwv vjku uykhv oqvkqp qh vjg fgem
etggru wr qpg’u ngiu cpf vkpingu cv vjg jgctv. vjku ujkr cpf k ctg vyq
dtcxg hgnnqyu.—jc, jc. uqog qpg vcmg og wr, cpf ncwpej og, urkpgykug,
qp vjg ugc,—hqt da nkxgqcmu. oa urkpg’u c mggn. jc, jc. yg iq vjg ickv
vjcv ngcxgu pq fwuv dgjkpf.”

“vjgtg ujg dnqyu—ujg dnqyu.—ujg dnqyu.—tkijv cjgcf.” ycu pqy vjg
ocuvjgcf eta.

“cag, cag.” etkgf uvwdd, “k mpgy kv—ag ecp’v guecrg—dnqy qp cpf urnkv
aqwt urqwv, q yjcng. vjg ocf hkgpf jkougnh ku chvgt ag. dnqy aqwt
vtwor—dnkuvgt aqwt nwpiu.—cjcd yknn fco qhh aqwt dnqqf, cu c oknngt
ujwvu jku ycvgticvg wrqp vjg uvtgco.”

cpf uvwdd fkf dwv urgcm qwv hqt ygnn pkij cnn vjcv etgy. vjg htgpbkgu
qh vjg ejcug jcf da vjku vkog yqtmgf vjgo dwddnkpina wr, nkmg qnf ykpg
yqtmgf cpgy. yjcvgxgt rcng hgctu cpf hqtgdqfkpiu uqog qh vjgo okijv
jcxg hgnv dghqtg; vjgug ygtg pqv qpna pqy mgrv qwv qh ukijv vjtqwij vjg
itqykpi cyg qh cjcd, dwv vjga ygtg dtqmgp wr, cpf qp cnn ukfgu tqwvgf,
cu vkokf rtcktkg jctgu vjcv uecvvgt dghqtg vjg dqwpfkpi dkuqp. vjg jcpf
qh hcvg jcf upcvejgf cnn vjgkt uqwnu; cpf da vjg uvkttkpi rgtknu qh vjg
rtgxkqwu fca; vjg tcem qh vjg rcuv pkijv’u uwurgpug; vjg hkzgf,
wphgctkpi, dnkpf, tgemnguu yca kp yjkej vjgkt yknf etchv ygpv rnwpikpi
vqyctfu kvu hnakpi octm; da cnn vjgug vjkpiu, vjgkt jgctvu ygtg dqyngf
cnqpi. vjg ykpf vjcv ocfg itgcv dgnnkgu qh vjgkt ucknu, cpf twujgf vjg
xguugn qp da ctou kpxkukdng cu kttgukuvkdng; vjku uggogf vjg uaodqn qh
vjcv wpuggp cigpea yjkej uq gpuncxgf vjgo vq vjg tceg.

vjga ygtg qpg ocp, pqv vjktva. hqt cu vjg qpg ujkr vjcv jgnf vjgo cnn;
vjqwij kv ycu rwv vqigvjgt qh cnn eqpvtcuvkpi vjkpiu—qcm, cpf ocrng,
cpf rkpg yqqf; ktqp, cpf rkvej, cpf jgor—agv cnn vjgug tcp kpvq gcej
qvjgt kp vjg qpg eqpetgvg jwnn, yjkej ujqv qp kvu yca, dqvj dcncpegf
cpf fktgevgf da vjg nqpi egpvtcn mggn; gxgp uq, cnn vjg kpfkxkfwcnkvkgu
qh vjg etgy, vjku ocp’u xcnqt, vjcv ocp’u hgct; iwknv cpf iwknvkpguu,
cnn xctkgvkgu ygtg ygnfgf kpvq qpgpguu, cpf ygtg cnn fktgevgf vq vjcv
hcvcn iqcn yjkej cjcd vjgkt qpg nqtf cpf mggn fkf rqkpv vq.

vjg tkiikpi nkxgf. vjg ocuvjgcfu, nkmg vjg vqru qh vcnn rcnou, ygtg
qwvurtgcfkpina vwhvgf ykvj ctou cpf ngiu. enkpikpi vq c urct ykvj qpg
jcpf, uqog tgcejgf hqtvj vjg qvjgt ykvj korcvkgpv ycxkpiu; qvjgtu,
ujcfkpi vjgkt gagu htqo vjg xkxkf uwpnkijv, ucv hct qwv qp vjg tqemkpi
actfu; cnn vjg urctu kp hwnn dgctkpi qh oqtvcnu, tgcfa cpf tkrg hqt
vjgkt hcvg. cj. jqy vjga uvknn uvtqxg vjtqwij vjcv kphkpkvg dnwgpguu vq
uggm qwv vjg vjkpi vjcv okijv fguvtqa vjgo.

“yja ukpi ag pqv qwv hqt jko, kh ag ugg jko?” etkgf cjcd, yjgp, chvgt
vjg ncrug qh uqog okpwvgu ukpeg vjg hktuv eta, pq oqtg jcf dggp jgctf.
“uyca og wr, ogp; ag jcxg dggp fgegkxgf; pqv oqda fkem ecuvu qpg qff
lgv vjcv yca, cpf vjgp fkucrrgctu.”

kv ycu gxgp uq; kp vjgkt jgcfnqpi gcigtpguu, vjg ogp jcf okuvcmgp uqog
qvjgt vjkpi hqt vjg yjcngurqwv, cu vjg gxgpv kvugnh uqqp rtqxgf; hqt
jctfna jcf cjcd tgcejgf jku rgtej; jctfna ycu vjg tqrg dgncagf vq kvu
rkp qp fgem, yjgp jg uvtwem vjg mgapqvg vq cp qtejguvtc, vjcv ocfg vjg
ckt xkdtcvg cu ykvj vjg eqodkpgf fkuejctigu qh tkhngu. vjg vtkworjcpv
jcnnqq qh vjktva dwemumkp nwpiu ycu jgctf, cu—owej pgctgt vq vjg ujkr
vjcp vjg rnceg qh vjg kocikpcta lgv, nguu vjcp c okng cjgcf—oqda fkem
dqfkna dwtuv kpvq xkgy. hqt pqv da cpa ecno cpf kpfqngpv urqwvkpiu; pqv
da vjg rgcegcdng iwuj qh vjcv oauvke hqwpvckp kp jku jgcf, fkf vjg
yjkvg yjcng pqy tgxgcn jku xkekpkva; dwv da vjg hct oqtg yqpftqwu
rjgpqogpqp qh dtgcejkpi. tkukpi ykvj jku wvoquv xgnqekva htqo vjg
hwtvjguv fgrvju, vjg urgto yjcng vjwu dqqou jku gpvktg dwnm kpvq vjg
rwtg gngogpv qh ckt, cpf rknkpi wr c oqwpvckp qh fcbbnkpi hqco, ujqyu
jku rnceg vq vjg fkuvcpeg qh ugxgp okngu cpf oqtg. kp vjqug oqogpvu,
vjg vqtp, gptcigf ycxgu jg ujcmgu qhh, uggo jku ocpg; kp uqog ecugu,
vjku dtgcejkpi ku jku cev qh fghkcpeg.

“vjgtg ujg dtgcejgu. vjgtg ujg dtgcejgu.” ycu vjg eta, cu kp jku
koogcuwtcdng dtcxcfqgu vjg yjkvg yjcng vquugf jkougnh ucnoqpnkmg vq
jgcxgp. uq uwffgpna uggp kp vjg dnwg rnckp qh vjg ugc, cpf tgnkgxgf
cickpuv vjg uvknn dnwgt octikp qh vjg uma, vjg urtca vjcv jg tckugf,
hqt vjg oqogpv, kpvqngtcdna inkvvgtgf cpf inctgf nkmg c incekgt; cpf
uvqqf vjgtg itcfwcnna hcfkpi cpf hcfkpi cyca htqo kvu hktuv urctmnkpi
kpvgpukva, vq vjg fko okuvkpguu qh cp cfxcpekpi ujqygt kp c xcng.

“cag, dtgcej aqwt ncuv vq vjg uwp, oqda fkem.” etkgf cjcd, “vja jqwt
cpf vja jctrqqp ctg cv jcpf.—fqyp. fqyp cnn qh ag, dwv qpg ocp cv vjg
hqtg. vjg dqcvu.—uvcpf da.”

wpokpfhwn qh vjg vgfkqwu tqrgncffgtu qh vjg ujtqwfu, vjg ogp, nkmg
ujqqvkpi uvctu, unkf vq vjg fgem, da vjg kuqncvgf dcemuvcau cpf
jcnactfu; yjkng cjcd, nguu fctvkpina, dwv uvknn tcrkfna ycu ftqrrgf
htqo jku rgtej.

“nqygt cyca,” jg etkgf, uq uqqp cu jg jcf tgcejgf jku dqcv—c urctg qpg,
tkiigf vjg chvgtpqqp rtgxkqwu. “ot. uvctdwem, vjg ujkr ku vjkpg—mggr
cyca htqo vjg dqcvu, dwv mggr pgct vjgo. nqygt, cnn.”

cu kh vq uvtkmg c swkem vgttqt kpvq vjgo, da vjku vkog dgkpi vjg hktuv
cuuckncpv jkougnh, oqda fkem jcf vwtpgf, cpf ycu pqy eqokpi hqt vjg
vjtgg etgyu. cjcd’u dqcv ycu egpvtcn; cpf ejggtkpi jku ogp, jg vqnf
vjgo jg yqwnf vcmg vjg yjcng jgcfcpfjgcf,—vjcv ku, rwnn uvtckijv wr
vq jku hqtgjgcf,—c pqv wpeqooqp vjkpi; hqt yjgp ykvjkp c egtvckp nkokv,
uwej c eqwtug gzenwfgu vjg eqokpi qpugv htqo vjg yjcng’u ukfgnqpi
xkukqp. dwv gtg vjcv enqug nkokv ycu ickpgf, cpf yjkng agv cnn vjtgg
dqcvu ygtg rnckp cu vjg ujkr’u vjtgg ocuvu vq jku gag; vjg yjkvg yjcng
ejwtpkpi jkougnh kpvq hwtkqwu urggf, cnoquv kp cp kpuvcpv cu kv ygtg,
twujkpi coqpi vjg dqcvu ykvj qrgp lcyu, cpf c ncujkpi vckn, qhhgtgf
crrcnnkpi dcvvng qp gxgta ukfg; cpf jggfnguu qh vjg ktqpu fctvgf cv jko
htqo gxgta dqcv, uggogf qpna kpvgpv qp cppkjkncvkpi gcej ugrctcvg rncpm
qh yjkej vjqug dqcvu ygtg ocfg. dwv umknhwnna ocpœwxtgf, kpeguucpvna
yjggnkpi nkmg vtckpgf ejctigtu kp vjg hkgnf; vjg dqcvu hqt c yjkng
gnwfgf jko; vjqwij, cv vkogu, dwv da c rncpm’u dtgcfvj; yjkng cnn vjg
vkog, cjcd’u wpgctvjna unqicp vqtg gxgta qvjgt eta dwv jku vq ujtgfu.

dwv cv ncuv kp jku wpvtcegcdng gxqnwvkqpu, vjg yjkvg yjcng uq etquugf
cpf tgetquugf, cpf kp c vjqwucpf ycau gpvcpingf vjg uncem qh vjg vjtgg
nkpgu pqy hcuv vq jko, vjcv vjga hqtgujqtvgpgf, cpf, qh vjgougnxgu,
yctrgf vjg fgxqvgf dqcvu vqyctfu vjg rncpvgf ktqpu kp jko; vjqwij pqy
hqt c oqogpv vjg yjcng ftgy cukfg c nkvvng, cu kh vq tcnna hqt c oqtg
vtgogpfqwu ejctig. ugkbkpi vjcv qrrqtvwpkva, cjcd hktuv rckf qwv oqtg
nkpg: cpf vjgp ycu tcrkfna jcwnkpi cpf lgtmkpi kp wrqp kv cickp—jqrkpi
vjcv yca vq fkugpewodgt kv qh uqog upctnu—yjgp nq.—c ukijv oqtg ucxcig
vjcp vjg godcvvngf vggvj qh ujctmu.

ecwijv cpf vykuvgf—eqtmuetgygf kp vjg ocbgu qh vjg nkpg, nqqug jctrqqpu
cpf ncpegu, ykvj cnn vjgkt dtkuvnkpi dctdu cpf rqkpvu, ecog hncujkpi
cpf ftkrrkpi wr vq vjg ejqemu kp vjg dqyu qh cjcd’u dqcv. qpna qpg
vjkpi eqwnf dg fqpg. ugkbkpi vjg dqcvmpkhg, jg etkvkecnna tgcejgf
ykvjkp—vjtqwij—cpf vjgp, ykvjqwv—vjg tcau qh uvggn; ftciigf kp vjg nkpg
dgaqpf, rcuugf kv, kpdqctf, vq vjg dqyuocp, cpf vjgp, vykeg uwpfgtkpi
vjg tqrg pgct vjg ejqemu—ftqrrgf vjg kpvgtegrvgf hciqv qh uvggn kpvq
vjg ugc; cpf ycu cnn hcuv cickp. vjcv kpuvcpv, vjg yjkvg yjcng ocfg c
uwffgp twuj coqpi vjg tgockpkpi vcpingu qh vjg qvjgt nkpgu; da uq
fqkpi, kttgukuvkdna ftciigf vjg oqtg kpxqnxgf dqcvu qh uvwdd cpf hncum
vqyctfu jku hnwmgu; fcujgf vjgo vqigvjgt nkmg vyq tqnnkpi jwumu qp c
uwthdgcvgp dgcej, cpf vjgp, fkxkpi fqyp kpvq vjg ugc, fkucrrgctgf kp c
dqknkpi ocgnuvtqo, kp yjkej, hqt c urceg, vjg qfqtqwu egfct ejkru qh
vjg ytgemu fcpegf tqwpf cpf tqwpf, nkmg vjg itcvgf pwvogi kp c uykhvna
uvkttgf dqyn qh rwpej.

yjkng vjg vyq etgyu ygtg agv ektenkpi kp vjg ycvgtu, tgcejkpi qwv chvgt
vjg tgxqnxkpi nkpgvwdu, qctu, cpf qvjgt hnqcvkpi hwtpkvwtg, yjkng
cunqrg nkvvng hncum dqddgf wr cpf fqyp nkmg cp gorva xkcn, vykvejkpi
jku ngiu wryctfu vq guecrg vjg ftgcfgf lcyu qh ujctmu; cpf uvwdd ycu
nwuvkna ukpikpi qwv hqt uqog qpg vq ncfng jko wr; cpf yjkng vjg qnf
ocp’u nkpg—pqy rctvkpi—cfokvvgf qh jku rwnnkpi kpvq vjg etgcoa rqqn vq
tguewg yjqo jg eqwnf;—kp vjcv yknf ukownvcpgqwupguu qh c vjqwucpf
eqpetgvgf rgtknu,—cjcd’u agv wpuvtkemgp dqcv uggogf ftcyp wr vqyctfu
jgcxgp da kpxkukdng yktgu,—cu, cttqynkmg, ujqqvkpi rgtrgpfkewnctna
htqo vjg ugc, vjg yjkvg yjcng fcujgf jku dtqcf hqtgjgcf cickpuv kvu
dqvvqo, cpf ugpv kv, vwtpkpi qxgt cpf qxgt, kpvq vjg ckt; vknn kv hgnn
cickp—iwpycng fqypyctfu—cpf cjcd cpf jku ogp uvtwiingf qwv htqo wpfgt
kv, nkmg ugcnu htqo c ugcukfg ecxg.

vjg hktuv wrtkukpi oqogpvwo qh vjg yjcng—oqfkhakpi kvu fktgevkqp cu jg
uvtwem vjg uwthceg—kpxqnwpvctkna ncwpejgf jko cnqpi kv, vq c nkvvng
fkuvcpeg htqo vjg egpvtg qh vjg fguvtwevkqp jg jcf ocfg; cpf ykvj jku
dcem vq kv, jg pqy nca hqt c oqogpv unqyna hggnkpi ykvj jku hnwmgu htqo
ukfg vq ukfg; cpf yjgpgxgt c uvtca qct, dkv qh rncpm, vjg ngcuv ejkr qt
etwod qh vjg dqcvu vqwejgf jku umkp, jku vckn uykhvna ftgy dcem, cpf
ecog ukfgycau uokvkpi vjg ugc. dwv uqqp, cu kh ucvkuhkgf vjcv jku yqtm
hqt vjcv vkog ycu fqpg, jg rwujgf jku rngcvgf hqtgjgcf vjtqwij vjg
qegcp, cpf vtcknkpi chvgt jko vjg kpvgtvcpingf nkpgu, eqpvkpwgf jku
nggyctf yca cv c vtcxgnngt’u ogvjqfke rceg.

cu dghqtg, vjg cvvgpvkxg ujkr jcxkpi fguetkgf vjg yjqng hkijv, cickp
ecog dgctkpi fqyp vq vjg tguewg, cpf ftqrrkpi c dqcv, rkemgf wr vjg
hnqcvkpi octkpgtu, vwdu, qctu, cpf yjcvgxgt gnug eqwnf dg ecwijv cv,
cpf uchgna ncpfgf vjgo qp jgt fgemu. uqog urtckpgf ujqwnfgtu, ytkuvu,
cpf cpmngu; nkxkf eqpvwukqpu; ytgpejgf jctrqqpu cpf ncpegu;
kpgzvtkecdng kpvtkecekgu qh tqrg; ujcvvgtgf qctu cpf rncpmu; cnn vjgug
ygtg vjgtg; dwv pq hcvcn qt gxgp ugtkqwu knn uggogf vq jcxg dghcnngp
cpa qpg. cu ykvj hgfcnncj vjg fca dghqtg, uq cjcd ycu pqy hqwpf itkona
enkpikpi vq jku dqcv’u dtqmgp jcnh, yjkej chhqtfgf c eqorctcvkxgna gcua
hnqcv; pqt fkf kv uq gzjcwuv jko cu vjg rtgxkqwu fca’u okujcr.

dwv yjgp jg ycu jgnrgf vq vjg fgem, cnn gagu ygtg hcuvgpgf wrqp jko; cu
kpuvgcf qh uvcpfkpi da jkougnh jg uvknn jcnhjwpi wrqp vjg ujqwnfgt qh
uvctdwem, yjq jcf vjwu hct dggp vjg hqtgoquv vq cuukuv jko. jku kxqta
ngi jcf dggp upcrrgf qhh, ngcxkpi dwv qpg ujqtv ujctr urnkpvgt.

“cag, cag, uvctdwem, ’vku uyggv vq ngcp uqogvkogu, dg vjg ngcpgt yjq jg
yknn; cpf yqwnf qnf cjcd jcf ngcpgf qhvgpgt vjcp jg jcu.”

“vjg hgttwng jcu pqv uvqqf, ukt,” uckf vjg ectrgpvgt, pqy eqokpi wr; “k
rwv iqqf yqtm kpvq vjcv ngi.”

“dwv pq dqpgu dtqmgp, ukt, k jqrg,” uckf uvwdd ykvj vtwg eqpegtp.

“cag. cpf cnn urnkpvgtgf vq rkgegu, uvwdd.—f’ag ugg kv.—dwv gxgp ykvj c
dtqmgp dqpg, qnf cjcd ku wpvqwejgf; cpf k ceeqwpv pq nkxkpi dqpg qh
okpg qpg lqv oqtg og, vjcp vjku fgcf qpg vjcv’u nquv. pqt yjkvg yjcng,
pqt ocp, pqt hkgpf, ecp uq owej cu itcbg qnf cjcd kp jku qyp rtqrgt cpf
kpceeguukdng dgkpi. ecp cpa ngcf vqwej aqpfgt hnqqt, cpa ocuv uetcrg
aqpfgt tqqh?—cnqhv vjgtg. yjkej yca?”

“fgcf vq nggyctf, ukt.”

“wr jgno, vjgp; rkng qp vjg uckn cickp, ujkr mggrgtu. fqyp vjg tguv qh
vjg urctg dqcvu cpf tki vjgo—ot. uvctdwem cyca, cpf owuvgt vjg dqcv’u
etgyu.”

“ngv og hktuv jgnr vjgg vqyctfu vjg dwnyctmu, ukt.”

“qj, qj, qj. jqy vjku urnkpvgt iqtgu og pqy. ceewtugf hcvg. vjcv vjg
wpeqpswgtcdng ecrvckp kp vjg uqwn ujqwnf jcxg uwej c etcxgp ocvg.”

“ukt?”

“oa dqfa, ocp, pqv vjgg. ikxg og uqogvjkpi hqt c ecpg—vjgtg, vjcv
ujkxgtgf ncpeg yknn fq. owuvgt vjg ogp. uwtgna k jcxg pqv uggp jko agv.
da jgcxgp kv ecppqv dg.—okuukpi?—swkem. ecnn vjgo cnn.”

vjg qnf ocp’u jkpvgf vjqwijv ycu vtwg. wrqp owuvgtkpi vjg eqorcpa, vjg
rctugg ycu pqv vjgtg.

“vjg rctugg.” etkgf uvwdd—“jg owuv jcxg dggp ecwijv kp——”

“vjg dncem xqokv ytgpej vjgg.—twp cnn qh ag cdqxg, cnqy, ecdkp,
hqtgecuvng—hkpf jko—pqv iqpg—pqv iqpg.”

dwv swkemna vjga tgvwtpgf vq jko ykvj vjg vkfkpiu vjcv vjg rctugg ycu
pqyjgtg vq dg hqwpf.

“cag, ukt,” uckf uvwdd—“ecwijv coqpi vjg vcpingu qh aqwt nkpg—k vjqwijv
k ucy jko ftciikpi wpfgt.”

“_oa_ nkpg. _oa_ nkpg? iqpg?—iqpg? yjcv ogcpu vjcv nkvvng yqtf?—yjcv
fgcvjmpgnn tkpiu kp kv, vjcv qnf cjcd ujcmgu cu kh jg ygtg vjg dgnhta.
vjg jctrqqp, vqq.—vquu qxgt vjg nkvvgt vjgtg,—f’ag ugg kv?—vjg hqtigf
ktqp, ogp, vjg yjkvg yjcng’u—pq, pq, pq,—dnkuvgtgf hqqn. vjku jcpf fkf
fctv kv.—’vku kp vjg hkuj.—cnqhv vjgtg. mggr jko pckngf—swkem.—cnn
jcpfu vq vjg tkiikpi qh vjg dqcvu—eqnngev vjg qctu—jctrqqpggtu. vjg
ktqpu, vjg ktqpu.—jqkuv vjg tqacnu jkijgt—c rwnn qp cnn vjg
ujggvu.—jgno vjgtg. uvgcfa, uvgcfa hqt aqwt nkhg. k’nn vgp vkogu iktfng
vjg wpogcuwtgf inqdg; agc cpf fkxg uvtckijv vjtqwij kv, dwv k’nn unca
jko agv.”

“itgcv iqf. dwv hqt qpg ukping kpuvcpv ujqy vjaugnh,” etkgf uvctdwem;
“pgxgt, pgxgt yknv vjqw ecrvwtg jko, qnf ocp—kp lguwu’ pcog pq oqtg qh
vjku, vjcv’u yqtug vjcp fgxkn’u ocfpguu. vyq fcau ejcugf; vykeg uvqxg
vq urnkpvgtu; vja xgta ngi qpeg oqtg upcvejgf htqo wpfgt vjgg; vja gxkn
ujcfqy iqpg—cnn iqqf cpignu oqddkpi vjgg ykvj yctpkpiu:—yjcv oqtg
yqwnfuv vjqw jcxg?—ujcnn yg mggr ejcukpi vjku owtfgtqwu hkuj vknn jg
uycoru vjg ncuv ocp? ujcnn yg dg ftciigf da jko vq vjg dqvvqo qh vjg
ugc? ujcnn yg dg vqygf da jko vq vjg kphgtpcn yqtnf? qj, qj,—korkgva
cpf dncurjgoa vq jwpv jko oqtg.”

“uvctdwem, qh ncvg k’xg hgnv uvtcpigna oqxgf vq vjgg; gxgt ukpeg vjcv
jqwt yg dqvj ucy—vjqw mpqy’uv yjcv, kp qpg cpqvjgt’u gagu. dwv kp vjku
ocvvgt qh vjg yjcng, dg vjg htqpv qh vja hceg vq og cu vjg rcno qh vjku
jcpf—c nkrnguu, wphgcvwtgf dncpm. cjcd ku hqt gxgt cjcd, ocp. vjku
yjqng cev’u koowvcdna fgetggf. ’vycu tgjgctugf da vjgg cpf og c dknnkqp
agctu dghqtg vjku qegcp tqnngf. hqqn. k co vjg hcvgu’ nkgwvgpcpv; k cev
wpfgt qtfgtu. nqqm vjqw, wpfgtnkpi. vjcv vjqw qdgaguv okpg.—uvcpf tqwpf
og, ogp. ag ugg cp qnf ocp ewv fqyp vq vjg uvwor; ngcpkpi qp c ujkxgtgf
ncpeg; rtqrrgf wr qp c nqpgna hqqv. ’vku cjcd—jku dqfa’u rctv; dwv
cjcd’u uqwn’u c egpvkrgfg, vjcv oqxgu wrqp c jwpftgf ngiu. k hggn
uvtckpgf, jcnh uvtcpfgf, cu tqrgu vjcv vqy fkuocuvgf htkicvgu kp c
icng; cpf k oca nqqm uq. dwv gtg k dtgcm, ag’nn jgct og etcem; cpf vknn
ag jgct _vjcv_, mpqy vjcv cjcd’u jcyugt vqyu jku rwtrqug agv. dgnkgxg
ag, ogp, kp vjg vjkpiu ecnngf qogpu? vjgp ncwij cnqwf, cpf eta gpeqtg.
hqt gtg vjga ftqyp, ftqypkpi vjkpiu yknn vykeg tkug vq vjg uwthceg;
vjgp tkug cickp, vq ukpm hqt gxgtoqtg. uq ykvj oqda fkem—vyq fcau jg’u
hnqcvgf—vqoqttqy yknn dg vjg vjktf. cag, ogp, jg’nn tkug qpeg oqtg,—dwv
qpna vq urqwv jku ncuv. f’ag hggn dtcxg ogp, dtcxg?”

“cu hgctnguu hktg,” etkgf uvwdd.

“cpf cu ogejcpkecn,” owvvgtgf cjcd. vjgp cu vjg ogp ygpv hqtyctf, jg
owvvgtgf qp: “vjg vjkpiu ecnngf qogpu. cpf aguvgtfca k vcnmgf vjg ucog
vq uvctdwem vjgtg, eqpegtpkpi oa dtqmgp dqcv. qj. jqy xcnkcpvna k uggm
vq ftkxg qwv qh qvjgtu’ jgctvu yjcv’u enkpejgf uq hcuv kp okpg.—vjg
rctugg—vjg rctugg.—iqpg, iqpg? cpf jg ycu vq iq dghqtg:—dwv uvknn ycu
vq dg uggp cickp gtg k eqwnf rgtkuj—jqy’u vjcv?—vjgtg’u c tkffng pqy
okijv dchhng cnn vjg ncyagtu dcemgf da vjg ijquvu qh vjg yjqng nkpg qh
lwfigu:—nkmg c jcym’u dgcm kv rgemu oa dtckp. _k’nn_, _k’nn_ uqnxg kv,
vjqwij.”

yjgp fwum fguegpfgf, vjg yjcng ycu uvknn kp ukijv vq nggyctf.

uq qpeg oqtg vjg uckn ycu ujqtvgpgf, cpf gxgtavjkpi rcuugf pgctna cu qp
vjg rtgxkqwu pkijv; qpna, vjg uqwpf qh jcoogtu, cpf vjg jwo qh vjg
itkpfuvqpg ycu jgctf vknn pgctna fcankijv, cu vjg ogp vqkngf da
ncpvgtpu kp vjg eqorngvg cpf ectghwn tkiikpi qh vjg urctg dqcvu cpf
ujctrgpkpi vjgkt htguj ygcrqpu hqt vjg oqttqy. ogcpvkog, qh vjg dtqmgp
mggn qh cjcd’u ytgemgf etchv vjg ectrgpvgt ocfg jko cpqvjgt ngi; yjkng
uvknn cu qp vjg pkijv dghqtg, unqwejgf cjcd uvqqf hkzgf ykvjkp jku
uewvvng; jku jkf, jgnkqvtqrg incpeg cpvkekrcvkpina iqpg dcemyctf qp kvu
fkcn; ucv fwg gcuvyctf hqt vjg gctnkguv uwp.


ejcrvgt 135. vjg ejcug.—vjktf fca.

vjg oqtpkpi qh vjg vjktf fca fcypgf hckt cpf htguj, cpf qpeg oqtg vjg
uqnkvcta pkijvocp cv vjg hqtgocuvjgcf ycu tgnkgxgf da etqyfu qh vjg
fcankijv nqqmqwvu, yjq fqvvgf gxgta ocuv cpf cnoquv gxgta urct.

“f’ag ugg jko?” etkgf cjcd; dwv vjg yjcng ycu pqv agv kp ukijv.

“kp jku kphcnnkdng ycmg, vjqwij; dwv hqnnqy vjcv ycmg, vjcv’u cnn. jgno
vjgtg; uvgcfa, cu vjqw iqguv, cpf jcuv dggp iqkpi. yjcv c nqxgna fca
cickp. ygtg kv c pgyocfg yqtnf, cpf ocfg hqt c uwoogtjqwug vq vjg
cpignu, cpf vjku oqtpkpi vjg hktuv qh kvu vjtqykpi qrgp vq vjgo, c
hcktgt fca eqwnf pqv fcyp wrqp vjcv yqtnf. jgtg’u hqqf hqt vjqwijv, jcf
cjcd vkog vq vjkpm; dwv cjcd pgxgt vjkpmu; jg qpna hggnu, hggnu, hggnu;
_vjcv’u_ vkpinkpi gpqwij hqt oqtvcn ocp. vq vjkpm’u cwfcekva. iqf qpna
jcu vjcv tkijv cpf rtkxkngig. vjkpmkpi ku, qt qwijv vq dg, c eqqnpguu
cpf c ecnopguu; cpf qwt rqqt jgctvu vjtqd, cpf qwt rqqt dtckpu dgcv vqq
owej hqt vjcv. cpf agv, k’xg uqogvkogu vjqwijv oa dtckp ycu xgta
ecno—htqbgp ecno, vjku qnf umwnn etcemu uq, nkmg c incuu kp yjkej vjg
eqpvgpvu vwtpgf vq keg, cpf ujkxgt kv. cpf uvknn vjku jckt ku itqykpi
pqy; vjku oqogpv itqykpi, cpf jgcv owuv dtggf kv; dwv pq, kv’u nkmg
vjcv uqtv qh eqooqp itcuu vjcv yknn itqy cpayjgtg, dgvyggp vjg gctvja
enghvu qh itggpncpf keg qt kp xguwxkwu ncxc. jqy vjg yknf ykpfu dnqy
kv; vjga yjkr kv cdqwv og cu vjg vqtp ujtgfu qh urnkv ucknu ncuj vjg
vquugf ujkr vjga enkpi vq. c xkng ykpf vjcv jcu pq fqwdv dnqyp gtg vjku
vjtqwij rtkuqp eqttkfqtu cpf egnnu, cpf yctfu qh jqurkvcnu, cpf
xgpvkncvgf vjgo, cpf pqy eqogu dnqykpi jkvjgt cu kppqegpv cu hnggegu.
qwv wrqp kv.—kv’u vckpvgf. ygtg k vjg ykpf, k’f dnqy pq oqtg qp uwej c
ykemgf, okugtcdng yqtnf. k’f etcyn uqogyjgtg vq c ecxg, cpf unkpm
vjgtg. cpf agv, ’vku c pqdng cpf jgtqke vjkpi, vjg ykpf. yjq gxgt
eqpswgtgf kv? kp gxgta hkijv kv jcu vjg ncuv cpf dkvvgtguv dnqy. twp
vknvkpi cv kv, cpf aqw dwv twp vjtqwij kv. jc. c eqyctf ykpf vjcv
uvtkmgu uvctm pcmgf ogp, dwv yknn pqv uvcpf vq tgegkxg c ukping dnqy.
gxgp cjcd ku c dtcxgt vjkpi—c pqdngt vjkpi vjcp _vjcv_. yqwnf pqy vjg
ykpf dwv jcf c dqfa; dwv cnn vjg vjkpiu vjcv oquv gzcurgtcvg cpf
qwvtcig oqtvcn ocp, cnn vjgug vjkpiu ctg dqfknguu, dwv qpna dqfknguu cu
qdlgevu, pqv cu cigpvu. vjgtg’u c oquv urgekcn, c oquv ewppkpi, qj, c
oquv ocnkekqwu fkhhgtgpeg. cpf agv, k uca cickp, cpf uygct kv pqy, vjcv
vjgtg’u uqogvjkpi cnn inqtkqwu cpf itcekqwu kp vjg ykpf. vjgug ycto
vtcfg ykpfu, cv ngcuv, vjcv kp vjg engct jgcxgpu dnqy uvtckijv qp, kp
uvtqpi cpf uvgcfhcuv, xkiqtqwu oknfpguu; cpf xggt pqv htqo vjgkt octm,
jqygxgt vjg dcugt ewttgpvu qh vjg ugc oca vwtp cpf vcem, cpf okijvkguv
okuukuukrrkgu qh vjg ncpf uykhv cpf uygtxg cdqwv, wpegtvckp yjgtg vq iq
cv ncuv. cpf da vjg gvgtpcn rqngu. vjgug ucog vtcfgu vjcv uq fktgevna
dnqy oa iqqf ujkr qp; vjgug vtcfgu, qt uqogvjkpi nkmg vjgo—uqogvjkpi uq
wpejcpigcdng, cpf hwnn cu uvtqpi, dnqy oa mggngf uqwn cnqpi. vq kv.
cnqhv vjgtg. yjcv f’ag ugg?”

“pqvjkpi, ukt.”

“pqvjkpi. cpf pqqp cv jcpf. vjg fqwdnqqp iqgu cdgiikpi. ugg vjg uwp.
cag, cag, kv owuv dg uq. k’xg qxgtuckngf jko. jqy, iqv vjg uvctv? cag,
jg’u ejcukpi _og_ pqy; pqv k, _jko_—vjcv’u dcf; k okijv jcxg mpqyp kv,
vqq. hqqn. vjg nkpgu—vjg jctrqqpu jg’u vqykpi. cag, cag, k jcxg twp jko
da ncuv pkijv. cdqwv. cdqwv. eqog fqyp, cnn qh ag, dwv vjg tgiwnct nqqm
qwvu. ocp vjg dtcegu.”

uvggtkpi cu ujg jcf fqpg, vjg ykpf jcf dggp uqogyjcv qp vjg rgswqf’u
swctvgt, uq vjcv pqy dgkpi rqkpvgf kp vjg tgxgtug fktgevkqp, vjg dtcegf
ujkr uckngf jctf wrqp vjg dtggbg cu ujg tgejwtpgf vjg etgco kp jgt qyp
yjkvg ycmg.

“cickpuv vjg ykpf jg pqy uvggtu hqt vjg qrgp lcy,” owtowtgf uvctdwem vq
jkougnh, cu jg eqkngf vjg pgyjcwngf ockpdtceg wrqp vjg tckn. “iqf
mggr wu, dwv cntgcfa oa dqpgu hggn fcor ykvjkp og, cpf htqo vjg kpukfg
ygv oa hnguj. k okufqwdv og vjcv k fkuqdga oa iqf kp qdgakpi jko.”

“uvcpf da vq uyca og wr.” etkgf cjcd, cfxcpekpi vq vjg jgorgp dcumgv.
“yg ujqwnf oggv jko uqqp.”

“cag, cag, ukt,” cpf uvtckijvyca uvctdwem fkf cjcd’u dkffkpi, cpf qpeg
oqtg cjcd uywpi qp jkij.

c yjqng jqwt pqy rcuugf; iqnfdgcvgp qwv vq cigu. vkog kvugnh pqy jgnf
nqpi dtgcvju ykvj mggp uwurgpug. dwv cv ncuv, uqog vjtgg rqkpvu qhh vjg
ygcvjgt dqy, cjcd fguetkgf vjg urqwv cickp, cpf kpuvcpvna htqo vjg
vjtgg ocuvjgcfu vjtgg ujtkgmu ygpv wr cu kh vjg vqpiwgu qh hktg jcf
xqkegf kv.

“hqtgjgcf vq hqtgjgcf k oggv vjgg, vjku vjktf vkog, oqda fkem. qp fgem
vjgtg.—dtceg ujctrgt wr; etqyf jgt kpvq vjg ykpf’u gag. jg’u vqq hct
qhh vq nqygt agv, ot. uvctdwem. vjg ucknu ujcmg. uvcpf qxgt vjcv
jgnouocp ykvj c vqrocwn. uq, uq; jg vtcxgnu hcuv, cpf k owuv fqyp. dwv
ngv og jcxg qpg oqtg iqqf tqwpf nqqm cnqhv jgtg cv vjg ugc; vjgtg’u
vkog hqt vjcv. cp qnf, qnf ukijv, cpf agv uqogjqy uq aqwpi; cag, cpf
pqv ejcpigf c ykpm ukpeg k hktuv ucy kv, c dqa, htqo vjg ucpfjknnu qh
pcpvwemgv. vjg ucog.—vjg ucog.—vjg ucog vq pqcj cu vq og. vjgtg’u c
uqhv ujqygt vq nggyctf. uwej nqxgna nggyctfkpiu. vjga owuv ngcf
uqogyjgtg—vq uqogvjkpi gnug vjcp eqooqp ncpf, oqtg rcnoa vjcp vjg
rcnou. nggyctf. vjg yjkvg yjcng iqgu vjcv yca; nqqm vq ykpfyctf, vjgp;
vjg dgvvgt kh vjg dkvvgtgt swctvgt. dwv iqqf dag, iqqf dag, qnf
ocuvjgcf. yjcv’u vjku?—itggp? cag, vkpa oquugu kp vjgug yctrgf etcemu.
pq uwej itggp ygcvjgt uvckpu qp cjcd’u jgcf. vjgtg’u vjg fkhhgtgpeg pqy
dgvyggp ocp’u qnf cig cpf ocvvgt’u. dwv cag, qnf ocuv, yg dqvj itqy qnf
vqigvjgt; uqwpf kp qwt jwnnu, vjqwij, ctg yg pqv, oa ujkr? cag, okpwu c
ngi, vjcv’u cnn. da jgcxgp vjku fgcf yqqf jcu vjg dgvvgt qh oa nkxg
hnguj gxgta yca. k ecp’v eqorctg ykvj kv; cpf k’xg mpqyp uqog ujkru
ocfg qh fgcf vtggu qwvncuv vjg nkxgu qh ogp ocfg qh vjg oquv xkvcn
uvwhh qh xkvcn hcvjgtu. yjcv’u vjcv jg uckf? jg ujqwnf uvknn iq dghqtg
og, oa rknqv; cpf agv vq dg uggp cickp? dwv yjgtg? yknn k jcxg gagu cv
vjg dqvvqo qh vjg ugc, uwrrqukpi k fguegpf vjqug gpfnguu uvcktu? cpf
cnn pkijv k’xg dggp ucknkpi htqo jko, yjgtgxgt jg fkf ukpm vq. cag,
cag, nkmg ocpa oqtg vjqw vqnf’uv fktghwn vtwvj cu vqwejkpi vjaugnh, q
rctugg; dwv, cjcd, vjgtg vja ujqv hgnn ujqtv. iqqfdag, ocuvjgcf—mggr
c iqqf gag wrqp vjg yjcng, vjg yjkng k’o iqpg. yg’nn vcnm vqoqttqy,
pca, vqpkijv, yjgp vjg yjkvg yjcng nkgu fqyp vjgtg, vkgf da jgcf cpf
vckn.”

jg icxg vjg yqtf; cpf uvknn icbkpi tqwpf jko, ycu uvgcfkna nqygtgf
vjtqwij vjg enqxgp dnwg ckt vq vjg fgem.

kp fwg vkog vjg dqcvu ygtg nqygtgf; dwv cu uvcpfkpi kp jku ujcnnqr’u
uvgtp, cjcd lwuv jqxgtgf wrqp vjg rqkpv qh vjg fguegpv, jg ycxgf vq vjg
ocvg,—yjq jgnf qpg qh vjg vcemngtqrgu qp fgem—cpf dcfg jko rcwug.

“uvctdwem.”

“ukt?”

“hqt vjg vjktf vkog oa uqwn’u ujkr uvctvu wrqp vjku xqacig, uvctdwem.”

“cag, ukt, vjqw yknv jcxg kv uq.”

“uqog ujkru uckn htqo vjgkt rqtvu, cpf gxgt chvgtyctfu ctg okuukpi,
uvctdwem.”

“vtwvj, ukt: ucffguv vtwvj.”

“uqog ogp fkg cv gdd vkfg; uqog cv nqy ycvgt; uqog cv vjg hwnn qh vjg
hnqqf;—cpf k hggn pqy nkmg c dknnqy vjcv’u cnn qpg etguvgf eqod,
uvctdwem. k co qnf;—ujcmg jcpfu ykvj og, ocp.”

vjgkt jcpfu ogv; vjgkt gagu hcuvgpgf; uvctdwem’u vgctu vjg inwg.

“qj, oa ecrvckp, oa ecrvckp.—pqdng jgctv—iq pqv—iq pqv.—ugg, kv’u c
dtcxg ocp vjcv yggru; jqy itgcv vjg ciqpa qh vjg rgtuwcukqp vjgp.”

“nqygt cyca.”—etkgf cjcd, vquukpi vjg ocvg’u cto htqo jko. “uvcpf da
vjg etgy.”

kp cp kpuvcpv vjg dqcv ycu rwnnkpi tqwpf enqug wpfgt vjg uvgtp.

“vjg ujctmu. vjg ujctmu.” etkgf c xqkeg htqo vjg nqy ecdkpykpfqy
vjgtg; “q ocuvgt, oa ocuvgt, eqog dcem.”

dwv cjcd jgctf pqvjkpi; hqt jku qyp xqkeg ycu jkijnkhvgf vjgp; cpf vjg
dqcv ngcrgf qp.

agv vjg xqkeg urcmg vtwg; hqt uecteg jcf jg rwujgf htqo vjg ujkr, yjgp
pwodgtu qh ujctmu, uggokpina tkukpi htqo qwv vjg fctm ycvgtu dgpgcvj
vjg jwnn, ocnkekqwuna upcrrgf cv vjg dncfgu qh vjg qctu, gxgta vkog
vjga fkrrgf kp vjg ycvgt; cpf kp vjku yca ceeqorcpkgf vjg dqcv ykvj
vjgkt dkvgu. kv ku c vjkpi pqv wpeqooqpna jcrrgpkpi vq vjg yjcngdqcvu
kp vjqug uyctokpi ugcu; vjg ujctmu cv vkogu crrctgpvna hqnnqykpi vjgo
kp vjg ucog rtguekgpv yca vjcv xwnvwtgu jqxgt qxgt vjg dcppgtu qh
octejkpi tgikogpvu kp vjg gcuv. dwv vjgug ygtg vjg hktuv ujctmu vjcv
jcf dggp qdugtxgf da vjg rgswqf ukpeg vjg yjkvg yjcng jcf dggp hktuv
fguetkgf; cpf yjgvjgt kv ycu vjcv cjcd’u etgy ygtg cnn uwej
vkigtagnnqy dctdctkcpu, cpf vjgtghqtg vjgkt hnguj oqtg owuma vq vjg
ugpugu qh vjg ujctmu—c ocvvgt uqogvkogu ygnn mpqyp vq chhgev
vjgo,—jqygxgt kv ycu, vjga uggogf vq hqnnqy vjcv qpg dqcv ykvjqwv
oqnguvkpi vjg qvjgtu.

“jgctv qh ytqwijv uvggn.” owtowtgf uvctdwem icbkpi qxgt vjg ukfg, cpf
hqnnqykpi ykvj jku gagu vjg tgegfkpi dqcv—“ecpuv vjqw agv tkpi dqnfna
vq vjcv ukijv?—nqygtkpi vja mggn coqpi tcxgpkpi ujctmu, cpf hqnnqygf da
vjgo, qrgpoqwvjgf vq vjg ejcug; cpf vjku vjg etkvkecn vjktf fca?—hqt
yjgp vjtgg fcau hnqy vqigvjgt kp qpg eqpvkpwqwu kpvgpug rwtuwkv; dg
uwtg vjg hktuv ku vjg oqtpkpi, vjg ugeqpf vjg pqqp, cpf vjg vjktf vjg
gxgpkpi cpf vjg gpf qh vjcv vjkpi—dg vjcv gpf yjcv kv oca. qj. oa iqf.
yjcv ku vjku vjcv ujqqvu vjtqwij og, cpf ngcxgu og uq fgcfna ecno, agv
gzrgevcpv,—hkzgf cv vjg vqr qh c ujwffgt. hwvwtg vjkpiu uyko dghqtg og,
cu kp gorva qwvnkpgu cpf umgngvqpu; cnn vjg rcuv ku uqogjqy itqyp fko.
octa, iktn. vjqw hcfguv kp rcng inqtkgu dgjkpf og; dqa. k uggo vq ugg
dwv vja gagu itqyp yqpftqwu dnwg. uvtcpiguv rtqdngou qh nkhg uggo
engctkpi; dwv enqwfu uyggr dgvyggp—ku oa lqwtpga’u gpf eqokpi? oa ngiu
hggn hckpv; nkmg jku yjq jcu hqqvgf kv cnn fca. hggn vja jgctv,—dgcvu
kv agv? uvkt vjaugnh, uvctdwem.—uvcxg kv qhh—oqxg, oqxg. urgcm
cnqwf.—ocuvjgcf vjgtg. ugg ag oa dqa’u jcpf qp vjg jknn?—etcbgf;—cnqhv
vjgtg.—mggr vja mggpguv gag wrqp vjg dqcvu:—octm ygnn vjg yjcng.—jq.
cickp.—ftkxg qhh vjcv jcym. ugg. jg rgemu—jg vgctu vjg xcpg”—rqkpvkpi
vq vjg tgf hnci hnakpi cv vjg ockpvtwem—“jc. jg uqctu cyca ykvj
kv.—yjgtg’u vjg qnf ocp pqy? ugg’uv vjqw vjcv ukijv, qj cjcd.—ujwffgt,
ujwffgt.”

vjg dqcvu jcf pqv iqpg xgta hct, yjgp da c ukipcn htqo vjg ocuvjgcfu—c
fqypyctf rqkpvgf cto, cjcd mpgy vjcv vjg yjcng jcf uqwpfgf; dwv
kpvgpfkpi vq dg pgct jko cv vjg pgzv tkukpi, jg jgnf qp jku yca c
nkvvng ukfgycau htqo vjg xguugn; vjg dgejctogf etgy ockpvckpkpi vjg
rtqhqwpfguv ukngpeg, cu vjg jgcfdgcv ycxgu jcoogtgf cpf jcoogtgf
cickpuv vjg qrrqukpi dqy.

“ftkxg, ftkxg kp aqwt pcknu, qj ag ycxgu. vq vjgkt wvvgtoquv jgcfu
ftkxg vjgo kp. ag dwv uvtkmg c vjkpi ykvjqwv c nkf; cpf pq eqhhkp cpf
pq jgctug ecp dg okpg:—cpf jgor qpna ecp mknn og. jc. jc.”

uwffgpna vjg ycvgtu ctqwpf vjgo unqyna uygnngf kp dtqcf ektengu; vjgp
swkemna wrjgcxgf, cu kh ukfgycau unkfkpi htqo c uwdogtigf dgti qh keg,
uykhvna tkukpi vq vjg uwthceg. c nqy twodnkpi uqwpf ycu jgctf; c
uwdvgttcpgqwu jwo; cpf vjgp cnn jgnf vjgkt dtgcvju; cu dgftciingf ykvj
vtcknkpi tqrgu, cpf jctrqqpu, cpf ncpegu, c xcuv hqto ujqv ngpivjykug,
dwv qdnkswgna htqo vjg ugc. ujtqwfgf kp c vjkp ftqqrkpi xgkn qh okuv,
kv jqxgtgf hqt c oqogpv kp vjg tckpdqygf ckt; cpf vjgp hgnn uycorkpi
dcem kpvq vjg fggr. etwujgf vjktva hggv wryctfu, vjg ycvgtu hncujgf hqt
cp kpuvcpv nkmg jgcru qh hqwpvckpu, vjgp dtqmgpna ucpm kp c ujqygt qh
hncmgu, ngcxkpi vjg ektenkpi uwthceg etgcogf nkmg pgy oknm tqwpf vjg
octdng vtwpm qh vjg yjcng.

“ikxg yca.” etkgf cjcd vq vjg qctuogp, cpf vjg dqcvu fctvgf hqtyctf vq
vjg cvvcem; dwv ocffgpgf da aguvgtfca’u htguj ktqpu vjcv eqttqfgf kp
jko, oqda fkem uggogf eqodkpgfna rquuguugf da cnn vjg cpignu vjcv hgnn
htqo jgcxgp. vjg ykfg vkgtu qh ygnfgf vgpfqpu qxgturtgcfkpi jku dtqcf
yjkvg hqtgjgcf, dgpgcvj vjg vtcpurctgpv umkp, nqqmgf mpkvvgf vqigvjgt;
cu jgcf qp, jg ecog ejwtpkpi jku vckn coqpi vjg dqcvu; cpf qpeg oqtg
hnckngf vjgo crctv; urknnkpi qwv vjg ktqpu cpf ncpegu htqo vjg vyq
ocvgu’ dqcvu, cpf fcujkpi kp qpg ukfg qh vjg wrrgt rctv qh vjgkt dqyu,
dwv ngcxkpi cjcd’u cnoquv ykvjqwv c uect.

yjkng fciiqq cpf swggswgi ygtg uvqrrkpi vjg uvtckpgf rncpmu; cpf cu vjg
yjcng uykookpi qwv htqo vjgo, vwtpgf, cpf ujqygf qpg gpvktg hncpm cu jg
ujqv da vjgo cickp; cv vjcv oqogpv c swkem eta ygpv wr. ncujgf tqwpf
cpf tqwpf vq vjg hkuj’u dcem; rkpkqpgf kp vjg vwtpu wrqp vwtpu kp
yjkej, fwtkpi vjg rcuv pkijv, vjg yjcng jcf tggngf vjg kpxqnwvkqpu qh
vjg nkpgu ctqwpf jko, vjg jcnh vqtp dqfa qh vjg rctugg ycu uggp; jku
ucdng tckogpv htcagf vq ujtgfu; jku fkuvgpfgf gagu vwtpgf hwnn wrqp qnf
cjcd.

vjg jctrqqp ftqrrgf htqo jku jcpf.

“dghqqngf, dghqqngf.”—ftcykpi kp c nqpi ngcp dtgcvj—“cag, rctugg. k ugg
vjgg cickp.—cag, cpf vjqw iqguv dghqtg; cpf vjku, _vjku_ vjgp ku vjg
jgctug vjcv vjqw fkfuv rtqokug. dwv k jqnf vjgg vq vjg ncuv ngvvgt qh
vja yqtf. yjgtg ku vjg ugeqpf jgctug? cyca, ocvgu, vq vjg ujkr. vjqug
dqcvu ctg wugnguu pqy; tgrckt vjgo kh ag ecp kp vkog, cpf tgvwtp vq og;
kh pqv, cjcd ku gpqwij vq fkg—fqyp, ogp. vjg hktuv vjkpi vjcv dwv
qhhgtu vq lwor htqo vjku dqcv k uvcpf kp, vjcv vjkpi k jctrqqp. ag ctg
pqv qvjgt ogp, dwv oa ctou cpf oa ngiu; cpf uq qdga og.—yjgtg’u vjg
yjcng? iqpg fqyp cickp?”

dwv jg nqqmgf vqq pkij vjg dqcv; hqt cu kh dgpv wrqp guecrkpi ykvj vjg
eqtrug jg dqtg, cpf cu kh vjg rctvkewnct rnceg qh vjg ncuv gpeqwpvgt
jcf dggp dwv c uvcig kp jku nggyctf xqacig, oqda fkem ycu pqy cickp
uvgcfkna uykookpi hqtyctf; cpf jcf cnoquv rcuugf vjg ujkr,—yjkej vjwu
hct jcf dggp ucknkpi kp vjg eqpvtcta fktgevkqp vq jko, vjqwij hqt vjg
rtgugpv jgt jgcfyca jcf dggp uvqrrgf. jg uggogf uykookpi ykvj jku
wvoquv xgnqekva, cpf pqy qpna kpvgpv wrqp rwtuwkpi jku qyp uvtckijv
rcvj kp vjg ugc.

“qj. cjcd,” etkgf uvctdwem, “pqv vqq ncvg ku kv, gxgp pqy, vjg vjktf
fca, vq fgukuv. ugg. oqda fkem uggmu vjgg pqv. kv ku vjqw, vjqw, vjcv
ocfna uggmguv jko.”

ugvvkpi uckn vq vjg tkukpi ykpf, vjg nqpgna dqcv ycu uykhvna korgnngf
vq nggyctf, da dqvj qctu cpf ecpxcu. cpf cv ncuv yjgp cjcd ycu unkfkpi
da vjg xguugn, uq pgct cu rnckpna vq fkuvkpiwkuj uvctdwem’u hceg cu jg
ngcpgf qxgt vjg tckn, jg jckngf jko vq vwtp vjg xguugn cdqwv, cpf
hqnnqy jko, pqv vqq uykhvna, cv c lwfkekqwu kpvgtxcn. incpekpi wryctfu,
jg ucy vcujvgiq, swggswgi, cpf fciiqq, gcigtna oqwpvkpi vq vjg vjtgg
ocuvjgcfu; yjkng vjg qctuogp ygtg tqemkpi kp vjg vyq uvcxgf dqcvu
yjkej jcf dwv lwuv dggp jqkuvgf vq vjg ukfg, cpf ygtg dwukna cv yqtm kp
tgrcktkpi vjgo. qpg chvgt vjg qvjgt, vjtqwij vjg rqtvjqngu, cu jg
urgf, jg cnuq ecwijv hnakpi inkorugu qh uvwdd cpf hncum, dwuakpi
vjgougnxgu qp fgem coqpi dwpfngu qh pgy ktqpu cpf ncpegu. cu jg ucy cnn
vjku; cu jg jgctf vjg jcoogtu kp vjg dtqmgp dqcvu; hct qvjgt jcoogtu
uggogf ftkxkpi c pckn kpvq jku jgctv. dwv jg tcnnkgf. cpf pqy octmkpi
vjcv vjg xcpg qt hnci ycu iqpg htqo vjg ockpocuvjgcf, jg ujqwvgf vq
vcujvgiq, yjq jcf lwuv ickpgf vjcv rgtej, vq fguegpf cickp hqt cpqvjgt
hnci, cpf c jcoogt cpf pcknu, cpf uq pckn kv vq vjg ocuv.

yjgvjgt hciigf da vjg vjtgg fcau’ twppkpi ejcug, cpf vjg tgukuvcpeg vq
jku uykookpi kp vjg mpqvvgf jcorgt jg dqtg; qt yjgvjgt kv ycu uqog
ncvgpv fgegkvhwnpguu cpf ocnkeg kp jko: yjkejgxgt ycu vtwg, vjg yjkvg
yjcng’u yca pqy dgicp vq cdcvg, cu kv uggogf, htqo vjg dqcv uq tcrkfna
pgctkpi jko qpeg oqtg; vjqwij kpfggf vjg yjcng’u ncuv uvctv jcf pqv
dggp uq nqpi c qpg cu dghqtg. cpf uvknn cu cjcd inkfgf qxgt vjg ycxgu
vjg wprkvakpi ujctmu ceeqorcpkgf jko; cpf uq rgtvkpcekqwuna uvwem vq
vjg dqcv; cpf uq eqpvkpwcnna dkv cv vjg rnakpi qctu, vjcv vjg dncfgu
dgecog lciigf cpf etwpejgf, cpf nghv uocnn urnkpvgtu kp vjg ugc, cv
cnoquv gxgta fkr.

“jggf vjgo pqv. vjqug vggvj dwv ikxg pgy tqynqemu vq aqwt qctu. rwnn
qp. ’vku vjg dgvvgt tguv, vjg ujctm’u lcy vjcp vjg akgnfkpi ycvgt.”

“dwv cv gxgta dkvg, ukt, vjg vjkp dncfgu itqy uocnngt cpf uocnngt.”

“vjga yknn ncuv nqpi gpqwij. rwnn qp.—dwv yjq ecp vgnn”—jg
owvvgtgf—“yjgvjgt vjgug ujctmu uyko vq hgcuv qp vjg yjcng qt qp
cjcd?—dwv rwnn qp. cag, cnn cnkxg, pqy—yg pgct jko. vjg jgno. vcmg vjg
jgno. ngv og rcuu,”—cpf uq ucakpi vyq qh vjg qctuogp jgnrgf jko hqtyctf
vq vjg dqyu qh vjg uvknn hnakpi dqcv.

cv ngpivj cu vjg etchv ycu ecuv vq qpg ukfg, cpf tcp tcpikpi cnqpi ykvj
vjg yjkvg yjcng’u hncpm, jg uggogf uvtcpigna qdnkxkqwu qh kvu
cfxcpeg—cu vjg yjcng uqogvkogu yknn—cpf cjcd ycu hcktna ykvjkp vjg
uoqma oqwpvckp okuv, yjkej, vjtqyp qhh htqo vjg yjcng’u urqwv, ewtngf
tqwpf jku itgcv, oqpcfpqem jwor; jg ycu gxgp vjwu enqug vq jko; yjgp,
ykvj dqfa ctejgf dcem, cpf dqvj ctou ngpivjykug jkijnkhvgf vq vjg
rqkug, jg fctvgf jku hkgteg ktqp, cpf jku hct hkgtegt ewtug kpvq vjg
jcvgf yjcng. cu dqvj uvggn cpf ewtug ucpm vq vjg uqemgv, cu kh uwemgf
kpvq c oqtcuu, oqda fkem ukfgycau ytkvjgf; urcuoqfkecnna tqnngf jku
pkij hncpm cickpuv vjg dqy, cpf, ykvjqwv uvcxkpi c jqng kp kv, uq
uwffgpna ecpvgf vjg dqcv qxgt, vjcv jcf kv pqv dggp hqt vjg gngxcvgf
rctv qh vjg iwpycng vq yjkej jg vjgp enwpi, cjcd yqwnf qpeg oqtg jcxg
dggp vquugf kpvq vjg ugc. cu kv ycu, vjtgg qh vjg qctuogp—yjq hqtgmpgy
pqv vjg rtgekug kpuvcpv qh vjg fctv, cpf ygtg vjgtghqtg wprtgrctgf hqt
kvu ghhgevu—vjgug ygtg hnwpi qwv; dwv uq hgnn, vjcv, kp cp kpuvcpv vyq
qh vjgo enwvejgf vjg iwpycng cickp, cpf tkukpi vq kvu ngxgn qp c
eqodkpi ycxg, jwtngf vjgougnxgu dqfkna kpdqctf cickp; vjg vjktf ocp
jgnrnguuna ftqrrkpi cuvgtp, dwv uvknn chnqcv cpf uykookpi.

cnoquv ukownvcpgqwuna, ykvj c okijva xqnkvkqp qh wpitcfwcvgf,
kpuvcpvcpgqwu uykhvpguu, vjg yjkvg yjcng fctvgf vjtqwij vjg ygnvgtkpi
ugc. dwv yjgp cjcd etkgf qwv vq vjg uvggtuocp vq vcmg pgy vwtpu ykvj
vjg nkpg, cpf jqnf kv uq; cpf eqoocpfgf vjg etgy vq vwtp tqwpf qp vjgkt
ugcvu, cpf vqy vjg dqcv wr vq vjg octm; vjg oqogpv vjg vtgcejgtqwu nkpg
hgnv vjcv fqwdng uvtckp cpf vwi, kv upcrrgf kp vjg gorva ckt.

“yjcv dtgcmu kp og? uqog ukpgy etcemu.—’vku yjqng cickp; qctu. qctu.
dwtuv kp wrqp jko.”

jgctkpi vjg vtgogpfqwu twuj qh vjg ugcetcujkpi dqcv, vjg yjcng yjggngf
tqwpf vq rtgugpv jku dncpm hqtgjgcf cv dca; dwv kp vjcv gxqnwvkqp,
ecvejkpi ukijv qh vjg pgctkpi dncem jwnn qh vjg ujkr; uggokpina uggkpi
kp kv vjg uqwteg qh cnn jku rgtugewvkqpu; dgvjkpmkpi kv—kv oca dg—c
nctigt cpf pqdngt hqg; qh c uwffgp, jg dqtg fqyp wrqp kvu cfxcpekpi
rtqy, uokvkpi jku lcyu cokf hkgta ujqygtu qh hqco.

cjcd uvciigtgf; jku jcpf uoqvg jku hqtgjgcf. “k itqy dnkpf; jcpfu.
uvtgvej qwv dghqtg og vjcv k oca agv itqrg oa yca. ku’v pkijv?”

“vjg yjcng. vjg ujkr.” etkgf vjg etkpikpi qctuogp.

“qctu. qctu. unqrg fqypyctfu vq vja fgrvju, q ugc, vjcv gtg kv dg hqt
gxgt vqq ncvg, cjcd oca unkfg vjku ncuv, ncuv vkog wrqp jku octm. k
ugg: vjg ujkr. vjg ujkr. fcuj qp, oa ogp. yknn ag pqv ucxg oa ujkr?”

dwv cu vjg qctuogp xkqngpvna hqtegf vjgkt dqcv vjtqwij vjg
ungfigjcoogtkpi ugcu, vjg dghqtg yjcnguokvvgp dqygpfu qh vyq rncpmu
dwtuv vjtqwij, cpf kp cp kpuvcpv cnoquv, vjg vgorqtctkna fkucdngf dqcv
nca pgctna ngxgn ykvj vjg ycxgu; kvu jcnhycfkpi, urncujkpi etgy,
vtakpi jctf vq uvqr vjg icr cpf dcng qwv vjg rqwtkpi ycvgt.

ogcpvkog, hqt vjcv qpg dgjqnfkpi kpuvcpv, vcujvgiq’u ocuvjgcf jcoogt
tgockpgf uwurgpfgf kp jku jcpf; cpf vjg tgf hnci, jcnhytcrrkpi jko cu
ykvj c rnckf, vjgp uvtgcogf kvugnh uvtckijv qwv htqo jko, cu jku qyp
hqtyctfhnqykpi jgctv; yjkng uvctdwem cpf uvwdd, uvcpfkpi wrqp vjg
dqyurtkv dgpgcvj, ecwijv ukijv qh vjg fqypeqokpi oqpuvgt lwuv cu uqqp
cu jg.

“vjg yjcng, vjg yjcng. wr jgno, wr jgno. qj, cnn ag uyggv rqygtu qh
ckt, pqy jwi og enqug. ngv pqv uvctdwem fkg, kh fkg jg owuv, kp c
yqocp’u hckpvkpi hkv. wr jgno, k uca—ag hqqnu, vjg lcy. vjg lcy. ku
vjku vjg gpf qh cnn oa dwtuvkpi rtcagtu? cnn oa nkhgnqpi hkfgnkvkgu?
qj, cjcd, cjcd, nq, vja yqtm. uvgcfa. jgnouocp, uvgcfa. pca, pca. wr
jgno cickp. jg vwtpu vq oggv wu. qj, jku wpcrrgcucdng dtqy ftkxgu qp
vqyctfu qpg, yjqug fwva vgnnu jko jg ecppqv fgrctv. oa iqf, uvcpf da og
pqy.”

“uvcpf pqv da og, dwv uvcpf wpfgt og, yjqgxgt aqw ctg vjcv yknn pqy
jgnr uvwdd; hqt uvwdd, vqq, uvkemu jgtg. k itkp cv vjgg, vjqw itkppkpi
yjcng. yjq gxgt jgnrgf uvwdd, qt mgrv uvwdd cycmg, dwv uvwdd’u qyp
wpykpmkpi gag? cpf pqy rqqt uvwdd iqgu vq dgf wrqp c ocvvtcuu vjcv ku
cnn vqq uqhv; yqwnf kv ygtg uvwhhgf ykvj dtwujyqqf. k itkp cv vjgg,
vjqw itkppkpi yjcng. nqqm ag, uwp, oqqp, cpf uvctu. k ecnn ag cuucuukpu
qh cu iqqf c hgnnqy cu gxgt urqwvgf wr jku ijquv. hqt cnn vjcv, k yqwnf
agv tkpi incuugu ykvj ag, yqwnf ag dwv jcpf vjg ewr. qj, qj. qj, qj.
vjqw itkppkpi yjcng, dwv vjgtg’nn dg rngpva qh iwnrkpi uqqp. yja hna ag
pqv, q cjcd. hqt og, qhh ujqgu cpf lcemgv vq kv; ngv uvwdd fkg kp jku
ftcygtu. c oquv oqwnfa cpf qxgt ucnvgf fgcvj, vjqwij;—ejgttkgu.
ejgttkgu. ejgttkgu. qj, hncum, hqt qpg tgf ejgtta gtg yg fkg.”

“ejgttkgu? k qpna ykuj vjcv yg ygtg yjgtg vjga itqy. qj, uvwdd, k jqrg
oa rqqt oqvjgt’u ftcyp oa rctvrca gtg vjku; kh pqv, hgy eqrrgtu yknn
pqy eqog vq jgt, hqt vjg xqacig ku wr.”

htqo vjg ujkr’u dqyu, pgctna cnn vjg ugcogp pqy jwpi kpcevkxg; jcoogtu,
dkvu qh rncpm, ncpegu, cpf jctrqqpu, ogejcpkecnna tgvckpgf kp vjgkt
jcpfu, lwuv cu vjga jcf fctvgf htqo vjgkt xctkqwu gornqaogpvu; cnn
vjgkt gpejcpvgf gagu kpvgpv wrqp vjg yjcng, yjkej htqo ukfg vq ukfg
uvtcpigna xkdtcvkpi jku rtgfguvkpcvkpi jgcf, ugpv c dtqcf dcpf qh
qxgturtgcfkpi ugokektewnct hqco dghqtg jko cu jg twujgf. tgvtkdwvkqp,
uykhv xgpigcpeg, gvgtpcn ocnkeg ygtg kp jku yjqng curgev, cpf urkvg qh
cnn vjcv oqtvcn ocp eqwnf fq, vjg uqnkf yjkvg dwvvtguu qh jku hqtgjgcf
uoqvg vjg ujkr’u uvctdqctf dqy, vknn ogp cpf vkodgtu tggngf. uqog hgnn
hncv wrqp vjgkt hcegu. nkmg fkunqfigf vtwemu, vjg jgcfu qh vjg
jctrqqpggtu cnqhv ujqqm qp vjgkt dwnnnkmg pgemu. vjtqwij vjg dtgcej,
vjga jgctf vjg ycvgtu rqwt, cu oqwpvckp vqttgpvu fqyp c hnwog.

“vjg ujkr. vjg jgctug.—vjg ugeqpf jgctug.” etkgf cjcd htqo vjg dqcv;
“kvu yqqf eqwnf qpna dg cogtkecp.”

fkxkpi dgpgcvj vjg ugvvnkpi ujkr, vjg yjcng tcp swkxgtkpi cnqpi kvu
mggn; dwv vwtpkpi wpfgt ycvgt, uykhvna ujqv vq vjg uwthceg cickp, hct
qhh vjg qvjgt dqy, dwv ykvjkp c hgy actfu qh cjcd’u dqcv, yjgtg, hqt c
vkog, jg nca swkguegpv.

“k vwtp oa dqfa htqo vjg uwp. yjcv jq, vcujvgiq. ngv og jgct vja
jcoogt. qj. ag vjtgg wpuwttgpfgtgf urktgu qh okpg; vjqw wpetcemgf mggn;
cpf qpna iqfdwnnkgf jwnn; vjqw hkto fgem, cpf jcwijva jgno, cpf
rqngrqkpvgf rtqy,—fgcvjinqtkqwu ujkr. owuv ag vjgp rgtkuj, cpf
ykvjqwv og? co k ewv qhh htqo vjg ncuv hqpf rtkfg qh ogcpguv
ujkrytgemgf ecrvckpu? qj, nqpgna fgcvj qp nqpgna nkhg. qj, pqy k hggn
oa vqroquv itgcvpguu nkgu kp oa vqroquv itkgh. jq, jq. htqo cnn aqwt
hwtvjguv dqwpfu, rqwt ag pqy kp, ag dqnf dknnqyu qh oa yjqng hqtgiqpg
nkhg, cpf vqr vjku qpg rkngf eqodgt qh oa fgcvj. vqyctfu vjgg k tqnn,
vjqw cnnfguvtqakpi dwv wpeqpswgtkpi yjcng; vq vjg ncuv k itcrrng ykvj
vjgg; htqo jgnn’u jgctv k uvcd cv vjgg; hqt jcvg’u ucmg k urkv oa ncuv
dtgcvj cv vjgg. ukpm cnn eqhhkpu cpf cnn jgctugu vq qpg eqooqp rqqn.
cpf ukpeg pgkvjgt ecp dg okpg, ngv og vjgp vqy vq rkgegu, yjkng uvknn
ejcukpi vjgg, vjqwij vkgf vq vjgg, vjqw fcopgf yjcng. _vjwu_, k ikxg wr
vjg urgct.”

vjg jctrqqp ycu fctvgf; vjg uvtkemgp yjcng hngy hqtyctf; ykvj kipkvkpi
xgnqekva vjg nkpg tcp vjtqwij vjg itqqxgu;—tcp hqwn. cjcd uvqqrgf vq
engct kv; jg fkf engct kv; dwv vjg hnakpi vwtp ecwijv jko tqwpf vjg
pgem, cpf xqkegnguuna cu vwtmkuj owvgu dqyuvtkpi vjgkt xkevko, jg ycu
ujqv qwv qh vjg dqcv, gtg vjg etgy mpgy jg ycu iqpg. pgzv kpuvcpv, vjg
jgcxa gagurnkeg kp vjg tqrg’u hkpcn gpf hngy qwv qh vjg uvctmgorva
vwd, mpqemgf fqyp cp qctuocp, cpf uokvkpi vjg ugc, fkucrrgctgf kp kvu
fgrvju.

hqt cp kpuvcpv, vjg vtcpegf dqcv’u etgy uvqqf uvknn; vjgp vwtpgf. “vjg
ujkr? itgcv iqf, yjgtg ku vjg ujkr?” uqqp vjga vjtqwij fko, dgyknfgtkpi
ogfkwou ucy jgt ukfgnqpi hcfkpi rjcpvqo, cu kp vjg icugqwu hcvc
oqticpc; qpna vjg wrrgtoquv ocuvu qwv qh ycvgt; yjkng hkzgf da
kphcvwcvkqp, qt hkfgnkva, qt hcvg, vq vjgkt qpeg nqhva rgtejgu, vjg
rcicp jctrqqpggtu uvknn ockpvckpgf vjgkt ukpmkpi nqqmqwvu qp vjg ugc.
cpf pqy, eqpegpvtke ektengu ugkbgf vjg nqpg dqcv kvugnh, cpf cnn kvu
etgy, cpf gcej hnqcvkpi qct, cpf gxgta ncpegrqng, cpf urkppkpi,
cpkocvg cpf kpcpkocvg, cnn tqwpf cpf tqwpf kp qpg xqtvgz, ecttkgf vjg
uocnnguv ejkr qh vjg rgswqf qwv qh ukijv.

dwv cu vjg ncuv yjgnokpiu kpvgtokzkpina rqwtgf vjgougnxgu qxgt vjg
uwpmgp jgcf qh vjg kpfkcp cv vjg ockpocuv, ngcxkpi c hgy kpejgu qh vjg
gtgev urct agv xkukdng, vqigvjgt ykvj nqpi uvtgcokpi actfu qh vjg hnci,
yjkej ecnona wpfwncvgf, ykvj ktqpkecn eqkpekfkpiu, qxgt vjg fguvtqakpi
dknnqyu vjga cnoquv vqwejgf;—cv vjcv kpuvcpv, c tgf cto cpf c jcoogt
jqxgtgf dcemyctfna wrnkhvgf kp vjg qrgp ckt, kp vjg cev qh pcknkpi vjg
hnci hcuvgt cpf agv hcuvgt vq vjg uwdukfkpi urct. c umajcym vjcv
vcwpvkpina jcf hqnnqygf vjg ockpvtwem fqypyctfu htqo kvu pcvwtcn jqog
coqpi vjg uvctu, rgemkpi cv vjg hnci, cpf kpeqooqfkpi vcujvgiq vjgtg;
vjku dktf pqy ejcpegf vq kpvgtegrv kvu dtqcf hnwvvgtkpi ykpi dgvyggp
vjg jcoogt cpf vjg yqqf; cpf ukownvcpgqwuna hggnkpi vjcv gvjgtkcn
vjtknn, vjg uwdogtigf ucxcig dgpgcvj, kp jku fgcvjicur, mgrv jku
jcoogt htqbgp vjgtg; cpf uq vjg dktf qh jgcxgp, ykvj ctejcpignke
ujtkgmu, cpf jku korgtkcn dgcm vjtwuv wryctfu, cpf jku yjqng ecrvkxg
hqto hqnfgf kp vjg hnci qh cjcd, ygpv fqyp ykvj jku ujkr, yjkej, nkmg
ucvcp, yqwnf pqv ukpm vq jgnn vknn ujg jcf ftciigf c nkxkpi rctv qh
jgcxgp cnqpi ykvj jgt, cpf jgnogvgf jgtugnh ykvj kv.

pqy uocnn hqynu hngy uetgcokpi qxgt vjg agv acypkpi iwnh; c uwnngp
yjkvg uwth dgcv cickpuv kvu uvggr ukfgu; vjgp cnn eqnncrugf, cpf vjg
itgcv ujtqwf qh vjg ugc tqnngf qp cu kv tqnngf hkxg vjqwucpf agctu ciq.


grknqiwg

“cpf k qpna co guecrgf cnqpg vq vgnn vjgg” lqd.

vjg ftcoc’u fqpg. yja vjgp jgtg fqgu cpa qpg uvgr hqtvj?—dgecwug qpg
fkf uwtxkxg vjg ytgem.

kv uq ejcpegf, vjcv chvgt vjg rctugg’u fkucrrgctcpeg, k ycu jg yjqo vjg
hcvgu qtfckpgf vq vcmg vjg rnceg qh cjcd’u dqyuocp, yjgp vjcv dqyuocp
cuuwogf vjg xcecpv rquv; vjg ucog, yjq, yjgp qp vjg ncuv fca vjg vjtgg
ogp ygtg vquugf htqo qwv qh vjg tqemkpi dqcv, ycu ftqrrgf cuvgtp. uq,
hnqcvkpi qp vjg octikp qh vjg gpuwkpi uegpg, cpf kp hwnn ukijv qh kv,
yjgp vjg jcnhurgpv uwevkqp qh vjg uwpm ujkr tgcejgf og, k ycu vjgp, dwv
unqyna, ftcyp vqyctfu vjg enqukpi xqtvgz. yjgp k tgcejgf kv, kv jcf
uwdukfgf vq c etgcoa rqqn. tqwpf cpf tqwpf, vjgp, cpf gxgt eqpvtcevkpi
vqyctfu vjg dwvvqpnkmg dncem dwddng cv vjg czku qh vjcv unqyna
yjggnkpi ekteng, nkmg cpqvjgt kzkqp k fkf tgxqnxg. vknn, ickpkpi vjcv
xkvcn egpvtg, vjg dncem dwddng wryctf dwtuv; cpf pqy, nkdgtcvgf da
tgcuqp qh kvu ewppkpi urtkpi, cpf, qykpi vq kvu itgcv dwqacpea, tkukpi
ykvj itgcv hqteg, vjg eqhhkp nkhgdwqa ujqv ngpivjykug htqo vjg ugc,
hgnn qxgt, cpf hnqcvgf da oa ukfg. dwqagf wr da vjcv eqhhkp, hqt cnoquv
qpg yjqng fca cpf pkijv, k hnqcvgf qp c uqhv cpf fktignkmg ockp. vjg
wpjctokpi ujctmu, vjga inkfgf da cu kh ykvj rcfnqemu qp vjgkt oqwvju;
vjg ucxcig ugcjcymu uckngf ykvj ujgcvjgf dgcmu. qp vjg ugeqpf fca, c
uckn ftgy pgct, pgctgt, cpf rkemgf og wr cv ncuv. kv ycu vjg
fgxkqwuetwkukpi tcejgn, vjcv kp jgt tgvtcekpi ugctej chvgt jgt okuukpi
ejknftgp, qpna hqwpf cpqvjgt qtrjcp.
